Second edition Cover C M Y K
Thinking Skills
John Butterworth and Geoff Thwait

Second edition
John Butterworth and Geoff Thwaites
This lively coursebook encourages students to develop more
sophisticated and mature thinking processes by learning specific,
transferable skills independent of subject content which assist confident
engagement in argument and reasoning.
As well as giving a thorough grounding in critical thinking and problem
solving, the book discusses how to analyse and evaluate arguments,
manipulate numerical and graphical information and develop a range of
skills including data handling, logic and reasoning.
The second edition of the book has been substantially updated with new
and revised content throughout. The only endorsed coursebook offering
complete coverage of the Cambridge AS and A Level Thinking Skills
syllabus, this resource also contains extensive extra material to cover a
wide range of related awards.
Features include:
• clearly focused and differentiated critical thinking and problem solving
units that provide complete coverage of the Thinking Skills syllabus
and beyond
• a range of stimulating student activities with commentaries to develop
analytical skills
• summary of key concepts at the end of each chapter to review learning
• end-of-chapter assignments to reinforce knowledge and skills, with
answers at the back for self-assessment
• a mapping grid to demonstrate the applicability of each unit to awards
including Critical Thinking, BMAT and TSA.
Thinking Skills is written by two experienced examiners, who have
produced a lively and accessible text which all students of Thinking Skills
will find invaluable.
Visit education.cambridge.org/cie for information on our full range of
Cambridge International A Level titles including e-book versions and
mobile apps.

John Butterworth and Geoff Thwaites

Thinking Skills

Critical Thinking and Problem Solving

Butterworth and Thwaites

9781107606302

Critical Thinking and Problem Solving

Thinking Skills

Thinking Skills

ISBN 978-1-107-66996-3

Second edition

John Butterworth and Geoff Thwaites

Thinking Skills

Critical Thinking and Problem Solving
Second edition

cambridge university press

Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town,
Singapore, São Paulo, Delhi, Mexico City
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UK
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781107606302
© Cambridge University Press 2005, 2013
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2005
Second edition 2013
Printed in Italy by L.E.G.O. S.p.A.
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library
ISBN 978-1-107-60630-2 Paperback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or
accuracy of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in
this publication, and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is,
or will remain, accurate or appropriate. Information regarding prices, travel
timetables and other factual information given in this work is correct at
the time of first printing but Cambridge University Press does not guarantee
the accuracy of such information thereafter.

Contents
Unit 1 Thinking and reasoning
1.1 Thinking as a skill 
1.2 An introduction to critical thinking 
1.3 Solutions not problems 

1
7
13

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
2.10

Claims, assertions, statements
Judging claims
Argument 
Identifying arguments
Analysing arguments
Complex arguments 
Conclusions 
Reasons 
Assumptions 
Flaws and fallacies

16
21
28
33
38
43
50
58
63
70

Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills
3.1 What do we mean by a ‘problem’?
3.2 How do we solve problems?
3.3 Selecting and using information
3.4 Processing data
3.5 Finding methods of solution
3.6 Solving problems by searching
3.7 Recognising patterns
3.8	
Hypotheses, reasons, explanations and inference
3.9 Spatial reasoning
3.10 Necessity and sufficiency
3.11 Choosing and using models
3.12 Making choices and decisions

79
82
86
90
93
98
102
106
112
116
119
123

Unit 4 Applied critical thinking
4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6

Inference
Explanation
Evidence
Credibility 
Two case studies
Critical thinking and science 

126
137
144
150
156
163

Contentsiii

4.7 Introducing longer arguments
4.8 Applying analysis skills
4.9 Critical evaluation
4.10	
Responding with further argument 
4.11 A self-assessment

170
177
183
191
195

Unit 5 Advanced problem solving 
5.1	
Combining skills – using imagination
5.2 Developing models
5.3 Carrying out investigations
5.4 Data analysis and inference

205
211
220
225

Unit 6 Problem solving: further techniques
6.1	
Using other mathematical methods
6.2 Graphical methods of solution
6.3	
Probability, tree diagrams and decision trees
6.4 Have you solved it?

231
235
240
246

Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level
7.1 Conditions and conditionals
7.2	
Soundness and validity: a taste of logic
7.3 Non-deductive reasoning
7.4 Reasoning with statistics
7.5 Decision making
7.6 Principles
7.7	
An argument under the microscope
7.8 Critical writing 
Answers to assignments
Appendix
Acknowledgements
Index

iv

Contents

249
254
262
269
279
287
295
301
311
342
344
345

Unit 1 Thinking and reasoning

1.1 Thinking as a skill
This book is about thinking. But it is not about
any thinking. It is about those kinds of
thinking that take conscious effort, and which
can be done well or badly. Most of our
thinking takes little or no conscious effort. We
just do it. You could almost say that we think
without thinking! If I am asked whether I
would like coffee or tea, I don’t have to
exercise skill to reply appropriately. Similarly if
I am asked a factual question, and I know the
answer, it takes no skill to give it. Expressing a
preference or stating a fact are not in
themselves thinking skills. There are language
and communication skills involved, of course,
and these are very considerable skills in their
own right. But they are contributory skills to
the activities which we are calling ‘thinking’.
This distinction is often made by assigning
some skills a ‘higher order’ than others. Much
work has been done by psychologists,
educationalists, philosophers and others to
classify and even rank different kinds of
thinking. Most would agree that activities
such as analysis, evaluation, problem solving
and decision making present a higher order of
challenge than simply knowing or recalling or
understanding facts. What distinguishes
higher orders of thinking is that they apply
knowledge, and adapt it to different purposes.
They require initiative and independence on
the part of the thinker. It is skills of this order
that form the content of this book.
Skills are acquired, improved, and judged
by performance. In judging any skill, there
are two key criteria: (1) the expertise with
which a task is carried out; (2) the difficulty of
the task. We are very familiar with this in the
case of physical skills. There are basic skills
like walking and running and jumping; and

there are advanced skills like gymnastics or
woodwork or piano playing. It doesn’t make
much sense to talk about jumping ‘well’
unless you mean jumping a significant
distance, or clearing a high bar, or
somersaulting in mid-air and landing on
your feet. There has to be a degree of
challenge in the task. But even when the
challenge is met, there is still more to be said
about the quality of the performance. One
gymnast may look clumsy and untidy,
another perfectly controlled and balanced.
Both have performed the somersault, but one
has done it better than the other: with more
economy of effort, and more skilfully.
The first of these two criteria also applies to
thinking. Once we have learned to count and
add, tell the time, read and understand a text,
recognise shapes, and so on, we do these
things without further thought, and we don’t
really regard them as skilled. You don’t have
to think ‘hard’ unless there is a hard problem
to solve, a decision to make, or a difficult
concept to understand. So, as with physical
performance, we judge thinking partly by the
degree of challenge posed by the task. If a
student can solve a difficult problem, within
a set time, that is usually judged as a sign of
greater skill than solving an easier one.
However, when it comes to assessing the
quality of someone’s thinking, matters are
more complicated. Mental performance is
largely hidden inside a person’s head, unlike
physical performance which is very visible. If
two students give the same right answer to a
question, there is no telling from the answer
alone how it was reached. One of the two
may simply have known the answer, or have
learned a mechanical way to obtain it – or

1.1 Thinking as a skill

1

even just guessed it. The other may have
worked it out independently, by reasoning
and persistence and imagination. Although
the difference may not show from the answer
given, the second student scores over the first
in the long term, because he or she has the
ability to adapt to different challenges. The
first is limited to what he or she knew and
could recall, or simply guessed correctly.

Reasoning
Reasoning is the ability most closely
associated with human advancement. It is
often cited as the faculty which marks the
difference between humans and other
animals. The famous apes studied by the
psychologist Wolfgang Köhler learned ways to
overcome problems, such as using a stick to
get at food that was beyond their reach; but
they discovered the solution by trial and error,
and then remembered it for the next time.
This is evidence of animal intelligence, and
certainly of skill; but it is not evidence that
apes can ‘reason’. As far as we can tell, no
animal ever draws conclusions on the basis of
observable facts. None of Köhler’s apes
thought anything like, ‘That banana is further
from the bars than the length of my arm.
Therefore I need to find a stick’; or ‘If this
stick is too short, I will need a longer one.’
Reasoning is the process by which we
advance from what we know already to new
knowledge and understanding. Being rational
is recognising that from some facts or beliefs
others follow, and using that understanding
to make decisions or form judgements with
confidence. If there is one overriding aim of
this book it is to improve students’
confidence in reasoning.

Creative thinking
Reasoning is not the only higher thinking
skill, nor the only kind of rationality.
Imaginative and creative activities are no less
important in the history of human
development and achievement. But that is not

2

Unit 1 Thinking and reasoning

to suggest that there are two distinct ways of
thinking: cold hard reason on one hand and
free-ranging creativity on the other. In fact,
there is so much overlap and interdependence
between the two that it is very difficult to say
where one begins and the other ends. Clearly
there are times when a seemingly insoluble
problem has been cracked by an imaginative
leap rather than a methodical process. Some of
the greatest advances in science have been the
result of creative thinking that appeared to
conflict with reason when first put forward.
Yet it is just as clear that many apparent
flashes of genius, which seem to come ‘out of
the blue’, actually come on the back of a lot of
careful and methodical work. Likewise, new
and creative ideas have to be understood and
explained to be of any practical value.
Reasoning is required both to enable and to
apply creative thinking, just as creative
thinking is needed to give a spark to
reasoning.

Reflection
Another quality that is evidently exclusive to
human thinking is reflection. Reflecting
means giving deep or serious or concentrated
thought to something, beyond the immediate
response to stimuli. When we are engaged in
reflection we don’t just make up our minds on
impulse, but carefully consider alternatives,
think about consequences, weigh up available
evidence, draw conclusions, test hypotheses
and so on. Critical thinking, problem solving
and decision making are all forms of reflective
thinking.
Moreover, the reflective thinker does not
focus only on the problem to be solved, the
decision to be made, or the argument to be
won, but also on the reasoning processes that
go into those activities. Reflecting on the way
we think – or thinking about thinking – helps
us to evaluate how effective our thinking is,
what its strengths are, where it sometimes
goes wrong and, most importantly, how it
can be improved.

Using this book
Throughout the book there are activities and
discussion topics to prompt and encourage
reflection on thinking and reasoning
themselves. At regular intervals in the chapters
you will find ‘Activity’ panels. You can use
these as opportunities to close the book, or
cover up the rest of the page, and think or talk
– or both – about the question or task. Each
activity is followed by a commentary offering
an appropriate answer, or some guidance on
the task, before returning to the chapter. By
comparing the discussion or solution in the
commentary with your own reflections and
responses, you can judge whether to go back
and look at a section again, or whether to
move on to the next one.
Although it is not essential to do all of these
activities, you are strongly urged to give some
time to them, as they will help greatly with
your understanding of the concepts and
procedures that make up the Thinking Skills
syllabus. The tasks also act as opportunities for
self-assessment, both of your own personal
responses, and of those of your colleagues if
you are working in groups. Small-group
discussion of the tasks is particularly valuable
because it gives you insight into other ways to
think and reason besides your own. You have
the opportunity to compare your responses
with those of others, as well as with the
responses suggested in the commentary. The
activities and commentaries are like a dialogue
between you and the authors of the book.
The book can be used either for a school or
college course in thinking skills, or by the student
for individual study. It is divided into seven units
with varying numbers of chapters within them.
Although it is not a straight-line progression,
there is an overall advance from basic skills to
applied skills and to higher levels of challenge.

Preparing for examinations
The backbone of this book is the Cambridge
syllabus for A and AS Level Thinking Skills. All
of the assessment objectives for that

examination are covered, though not
necessarily in the same order as they appear in
the specification. The book does not follow
the syllabus step by step or confine itself to
just one examination. If it did it would not
help you either to think more effectively or to
do well in your exam. Critical thinking and
problem solving are very broad skills, not
bodies of knowledge to be learned and
repeated. A competent thinker is one who is
able to deal with the unexpected as well as the
expected. This book therefore takes you well
beyond the content of one particular exam
and equips you with a deeper understanding
of the processes involved, as well as a flexible,
adaptive approach to the tasks you are set.
Because thinking skills are general and
transferable, the topics and concepts dealt
with in the coming units will also prepare
you for many other awards that involve
critical thinking and/or problem solving. The
table on pages 342–43 shows a range of
public examinations and admissions tests
whose content is covered by some or all of
the chapters. These include A Level Critical
Thinking (OCR and AQA); the BioMedical
Admissions Test (BMAT); Cambridge
Thinking Skills Assessment (TSA); Singapore
H2 Knowledge and Inquiry; and Theory
of Knowledge in the International
Baccalaureate (IB).

Other subjects
Finally, the value of developing your thinking
skills extends far beyond passing exams called
‘Thinking Skills’! It has been shown,
unsurprisingly, that confidence and aptitude
in critical thinking and problem solving will
assist students to achieve higher grades across
all the subjects that they study. Accordingly
you will find critical thinking, problem
solving and presenting well-reasoned
argument among the learning and assessment
objectives of just about every senior-school or
university course, whether in the sciences or
the arts and humanities.

1.1 Thinking as a skill

3

Beyond that, too, these are sought-after
qualities in a great many professions and
occupations. Hardly surprisingly, employers
want staff who can think for themselves,
solve problems, make decisions and
construct arguments.

What to expect
To give a taste of the structure and style of the
book, this chapter ends with an activity
similar to those which appear at regular
intervals in all of the coming units. You can
think of it as a trial run. The task is to solve a
puzzle entitled ‘The Jailhouse Key’. It is a
simple puzzle, but it introduces some of the
reasoning skills you will encounter in future
chapters, giving a foretaste of all of three
disciplines: problem solving, critical thinking
and decision making.

Activity
Two prisoners are held in a dungeon. One
night a mysterious visitor appears in their cell
and offers them a chance to escape. It is
only a chance because they must first reason
to a decision which will determine whether or
not they actually do go free.
Their cell is at the bottom of a long flight
of steps. At the top is the outer door. Three
envelopes, marked X, Y and Z, are placed on
the table in the prisoners’ cell. One of them,
they are told, contains the key to the outer
door, but they may take only one envelope
when they attempt to leave the cell. If they
choose the wrong one, they will stay locked
up forever, and the chance will not come
again. It is an all-or-nothing decision.
There are six clues, A to F, to help them –
or puzzle them, depending on how you look at
it. Two are printed on each envelope. There is
also a general instruction, on a separate
card, which stipulates:

4

Unit 1 Thinking and reasoning

 o more than one of the statements on each
N
envelope is false.
On envelope X it says:
A The jailhouse key is solid brass.
B The jailhouse key is not in this
envelope.
On envelope Y it says:
C The jailhouse key is not in this
envelope either.
D The jailhouse key is in envelope Z.
On envelope Z it says:
E The jailhouse key is solid silver.
F The jailhouse key is not in envelope X.
The prisoners may look inside the envelopes
if they wish, before deciding. They have five
minutes to make up their minds.
Decide which envelope the prisoners
should choose in order to escape from
the cell.
The best way to do this activity is to
discuss it with a partner, just as the two
prisoners would do in the story. As well as
deciding which envelope to choose, answer
this further question:
Why is the envelope you have chosen the
right one; and why can it not be either of the
others?

Commentary
Throughout this book you will be given
questions to answer, problems to solve, ideas
to think about or discuss, followed, as we have
said, by commentaries. The commentaries will
vary: some will provide the correct answer, if
there is one. Some will suggest various possible
answers, or different directions you could have
taken in your thinking. The purpose of the
activities and commentaries is to allow you to
assess your own progress and to give you
useful advice for tackling future tasks.

Sometimes you may question or disagree
with the commentary, especially later on when
you have gained experience. On other
occasions you will see from the commentary
where you went wrong, or missed an
important point, or reasoned ineffectively.
Don’t be disheartened if you do find you have
taken the wrong tack. It is part of the learning
process. Very often we learn more from making
mistakes than we do from easy successes.
In the present example there is only one
answer to the question: the key is in envelope
Z. The clues, although they seem confusing
and contradictory, do give you all the
information you need to make the correct
decision. Nonetheless, there are any number
of different ways to get to the solution, and
you may have found a quicker, clearer or
more satisfying procedure than the one you
are about to see. You may even have taken
one look at the puzzle and ‘seen’ the solution
straight away. Occasionally this happens.
However, you still have to explain and/or
justify your decision. That is the reflective part
of the task.

Procedures and strategies
Procedures and strategies can help with
puzzles and problems. These may be quite
obvious; or you may find it hard even to know
where to begin. One useful opening move is to
look at the information and identify the parts
that seem most relevant. At the same time you
can write down other facts which emerge from
them. Selecting and interpreting information
in this way are two basic critical thinking and
problem solving skills.
Start with the general claim, on the card,
that:
[1]	No more than one of the statements on
each envelope is false.
This also tells you that:
[1a]	At least one of the statements on each
envelope must be true.

It also tells you that:
[1b]	The statements on any one envelope
cannot both be false.
Although [1a] says exactly the same as the
card, it states it in a positive way rather than a
negative one. Negative statements can be
confusing to work with. A positive statement
may express the information more practically.
[1b] also says the same as the card, and
although it is negative it restates it in a plainer
way. Just rewording statements in this kind of
way draws useful information from them, and
helps you to organise your thoughts.
Now let’s look at the envelopes and ask
what more we can learn from the clues on
them. Here are some suggestions:
[2]	Statements B and F are both true or
both false (because they say the same
thing).
[3]	A and E cannot both be true. (You only
have to look at them to see why.)
Taking these two points together, we can apply
a useful technique known as ‘suppositional
reasoning’. Don’t be alarmed by the name. You
do this all the time. It just means asking
questions that begin: ‘What if . . .?’ For
example: ‘What if B and F were both false?’
Well, it would mean A and E would both have
to be true, because (as we know from [1a]) at
least one statement on each envelope has to be
true. But, as we know from [3], A and E cannot
both be true (because no key can be solid silver
and solid brass).
Therefore:
[4]	B and F have to be true: the key is not in
envelope X: it is in either Y or Z.
This is a breakthrough. Now all the clues we
need are on envelope Y. Using suppositional
reasoning again we ask: What if the key were in
Y? Well, then C and D would both be false. But
we know (from [1b]) that they can’t both be
false. Therefore the key must be in envelope Z.

1.1 Thinking as a skill

5

Thinking about thinking
You may have approached the puzzle in a
completely different way. For instance, you may
not have started with the clues on X and Z, but
gone for eliminating Y first. This is perfectly
possible and perfectly sensible. If the key were
in Y, both the clues on Y would be false. So it
could not be there and must be in X or Z. Then
you could eliminate X, as in the solution above.
You may not have used the ‘What if . . .?’
strategy at all. (Or you may have used it but
without calling it that or thinking of it that
way.) Different people have different ways of
doing things and reasoning is no exception. The
method used above is not the only way to get to
the solution, but it is a powerful strategy, and it
can be adapted to a wide variety of situations.
The method, in general terms, is this:

T ake a statement – we’ll call it S – and ask
yourself: ‘If S is true, what else would have to
be true too?’ If the second statement can’t be
true, then nor can S. You can do the same
thing asking: ‘What if S is false?’ If you find
that that would lead to something that can’t
possibly be true, then you know that S can’t
be false but must be true. (If you do Sudoku
puzzles you will be very familiar with this way
of thinking, although you may not have a
name for it.)
Whether you proceeded this way or not,
study the solution carefully and remember
how it works. Think of it as an addition to
your logical toolbox. The more procedures
and strategies that you have in the box, the
better your chances of solving future
problems or puzzles.

Summary
• When we talk of thinking as a skill we are
referring to higher-order activities, such as
analysing, evaluating and explaining; and
to challenges such as problem solving and
evaluating complex arguments.
• Three broad categories of higher-order
thinking are reasoning, creativity and
reflection. They all overlap.

6

Unit 1 Thinking and reasoning

• Reflection includes ‘thinking about
thinking’. In many ways the content of this
book is thinking about thinking: thinking
more confidently, more skilfully and more
independently.

1.2 An introduction to
critical thinking

What makes some thinking critical, others
uncritical?
‘Critical’, ‘criticism’ and ‘critic’ all
originate from the ancient Greek word
kritikos, meaning able to judge, discern or
decide. In modern English, a ‘critic’ is
someone whose job it is to make evaluative
judgements, for example about films, books,
music or food. Being ‘critical’ in this sense
does not merely mean finding fault or
expressing dislike, although that is another
meaning of the word. It means giving a fair
and unbiased opinion of something. Being
critical and thinking critically are not the
same thing.
If critical thinking did just mean judging,
wouldn’t that mean that anyone could do it
simply by giving an opinion? It takes no
special training or practice to pass a
judgement. If I watch a film and think that
it is boring, even though it has had good
reviews, no one can really say that my
judgement is wrong and the professional
critics are right. Someone can disagree with
me, but that is just another judgement, no
better or worse, you might say, than mine.
In a limited sense, this is true. But a serious
critical judgement is more than just a
statement of preference or taste. A critical
judgement must have some basis, which
usually requires a measure of knowledge or
expertise on the part of the person making
the judgement. Just saying ‘I like it’ or ‘I
don’t like it’ is not enough. There have to be
some grounds for a judgement before we can
call it critical.

Critical Thinking
(and critical ­thinking)
We should also be aware of the difference
between ‘critical thinking’, as a general
descriptive term, and Critical Thinking (with
a large C and T), which is the name of an
academic discipline with a broadly defined
syllabus. This book addresses both. In Units
2, 4 and 7 it covers the Critical Thinking (CT)
component of the Cambridge and other
syllabuses. But it goes well beyond the
confines of exam preparation. In fact, having
mentioned the distinction, we can largely
ignore it. To have maximum value, thinking
skills have to be transferable from one task or
context to others. The aim of this book is to
instil in students a critical approach to
reading, listening and reasoning generally;
and to provide the conceptual tools and skills
that enable them to respond critically to a
wide range of texts. The CT syllabus gives the
book its structure but not its whole purpose.
The objects of critical focus are referred to
generically as ‘texts’. The word is used in its
broadest sense. In real life a ‘text’ can be
spoken or written or visual: a television
programme, for example, or Tweet or blog; or
just a conversation. In a book, of course, the
texts are restricted to objects which can be
placed on a page, so that they are often
referred to instead as documents. Most of the
documents that are used in the coming
chapters are in the form of printed texts. But
some are graphical or numerical; or a mixture
of these. Two other generic terms that are

1.2 An introduction to critical thinking

7

used are ‘author’ and ‘audience’. The author
of a text is the writer, artist or speaker who
has produced it. The audience is the receiver:
reader, watcher or listener.
Some CT textbooks give the impression that
critical thinking is directed only at arguments.
This can be quite misleading if it is taken too
literally. Arguments are of particular interest in
CT, but by no means exclusively so.
Information, items of evidence, statements and
assertions, explanations, dialogues, statistics,
news stories, advertisements . . . all of these
and more may require critical responses. What
these various expressions have in common is
that they all make claims: that is, utterances
that are meant to be true. Since some claims are
in fact untrue, they need to be assessed critically
if we, the audience, are to avoid being misled.
We cannot just accept the truth of a claim
passively. Arguments are especially interesting
because their primary purpose is to persuade or
influence people in favour of some claim. The
critical question therefore becomes whether the
argument succeeds or fails: whether we should
allow ourselves to be persuaded by it, or not.

Activities
The core activities of CT can be summarised
under the following three headings:
• analysis
• evaluation
• further argument.
These recur throughout the book with
different texts and different levels of
challenge. As they are fully discussed in the
coming chapters there is no need to flesh
them out in detail here, but they do need a
brief introduction:
Analysis means identifying the key parts of
a text and reconstructing it in a way that fully
and fairly captures its meaning. This is
particularly relevant to arguments, especially
complex ones.
Evaluation means judging how successful a
text is: for example, how well an argument

8

Unit 1 Thinking and reasoning

supports its conclusion; or how strong some
piece of evidence is for a claim it is supposed to
support.
Further argument is self-explanatory. It is
the student’s opportunity to give his or her
own response to the text in question, by
presenting a reasoned case for or against the
claims it makes.
(In most CT examinations, including
Cambridge, these three tasks are set and
assessed in roughly equal measure. They are
referred to as the three ‘assessment objectives’.)

Attitude
As well as being an exercise of skill and
method, critical thinking also relates to an
attitude, or set of attitudes: a way of thinking
and responding. Here is a fragment from a
document. It is just a headline, no more. It
belongs to an article exploring the history of
aviation in the magazine section of a
newspaper. It challenges the familiar story of
the first manned, powered flight in a heavierthan-air machine, by Wilbur and Orville
Wright in 1903. The headline reads:
WRIGHT BROS NOT FIRST TO FLY
Suppose you have just glanced at the
headline, but not yet read the article. What
would your immediate reaction be? Would
you believe it on the grounds that the
newspaper would not print it if it wasn’t
true? Would you disbelieve it because for so
long it has been accepted as a historical fact
that Wilbur and Orville Wright were the
first? Might you even take the cynical view
that journalists make claims like this, true
or not, just to sell papers? (After all, it would
hardly make ‘news’, over a century later, to
announce that the Wright brothers were the
first to fly!)
Such reactions are common enough
among readers. What they are not is critical.
They are either passively accepting, or too
quickly dismissive. All suggest a closed mind
to the question behind the headline.

Critical thinking, by contrast, should
always be:
•
•
•
•

fair and open-minded
active and informed
sceptical
independent.

Most of these speak for themselves. Without
an open mind we cannot judge fairly and
objectively whether some statement or story
is true or not. It is hard sometimes to set aside
or discard an accepted or long-held belief; but
we must be willing to do it. Nor can we judge
any claim critically if we know nothing about
it. We have to be ready to take an active
interest in the subject matter, and be prepared
to investigate and enquire. Hasty, uninformed
judgements are never critical. At the very least
we would need to read the article before an
informed judgement is possible.
Some degree of scepticism is also needed: a
willingness to question or to entertain doubt.
Scepticism is not the same as cynicism. For
example, it doesn’t mean doubting everything
that journalists write as a matter of course
because you think that they are driven only by
the wish to grab the reader’s interest, with no
regard for fact. Critical appraisal requires each
claim or argument to be considered on its
merits, not on blanket prejudgements of their
authors – however justified those may
sometimes seem.
Lastly, critical thinking requires
independence. It is fine to listen to others, to
respect their beliefs and opinions, to learn
from teachers, to get information from books
and/or from online sources. But in order to
think critically you must also be prepared to
take some initiative: to ask your own questions
and reach your own conclusions. We get very
used to being told or persuaded what to think,
so that being faced with choices or decisions
can be uncomfortable. The methodology of
critical thinking can give you greater
confidence in your own judgements, and
more skill at defending them. But exercising the

judgement – using it to form your own views
– is ultimately up to you.
You cannot evaluate a bare assertion
without considering the reasons its author has
for making it. So the whole article is presented
on the next page. Read the document and
then have a go at the following question, a
typical critical thinking task.

Activity
How strongly does the information in the
article support the headline claim that the
Wright brothers were not the first to fly?
You can answer this individually, or in a
discussion group of two or more. Use your
own words. It is an introductory activity, so
you are not expected to use any special
terms or methods.

Commentary
This is a typical critical thinking question,
and one you will be asked in one form or
another many times on different topics. This
commentary will give you an idea, in quite
basic terms, of the kind of critical responses
you should be making.
Firstly, with any document, you need to be
clear what it is saying, and what it is doing.
We know from this article’s style that it is
journalistic. But perhaps the most important
point to make about it is that it is an argument.
It is an attempt to persuade the reader that one
of the most widely accepted stories of the 20th
century is fundamentally wrong: the Wright
brothers were not the first to fly a powered
aeroplane. That claim is, as we have seen,
made in the headline. It is echoed, though a
bit more cautiously, in the caption beside the
first photograph: ‘Or did they (make history)?’
The article then goes on to give, and briefly
develop, four reasons to support the claim.
Two obvious questions need answering:
(a) whether the claims in the article are

1.2 An introduction to critical thinking

9

WRIGHT BROS NOT FIRST TO FLY
machine . . .’, and quoted a
witness who affirmed: ‘The
machine worked perfectly, and
the operator had no problem
handling it.’
Whitehead was a poor
German immigrant to the
United States, whose voice
was easy to drown out in the
debates that followed. The
Wrights, by comparison, had
Wilbur and Orville Wright make history at Kitty Hawk, USA, December 1903.
Or did they?
influential friends and
supporters. The prestigious
in Pittsburg, and of signed
Many aviation experts and
Smithsonian Institute for
affidavits from 20 witnesses.
historians now believe that
Science, in return for
One was Louis Daravich,
German-born Gustave
ownership of the Flyer,
stating that he was present
Whitehead – seen here with
agreed not to publish or
and accompanied Whitehead
his aeroplane ‘No. 21’ – beat
exhibit anything referring to
on his flight. Randolf tells of
the Wright brothers into the
flights before 1903. The
sky by as much as two or even two more flights, in 1901 in
question we should be
a plane that Whitehead
three years.
asking is: Why?
named ‘No. 21’, and another
In a 1935 article in the
The jury is not so much out.
in the following year in
magazine Popular Aviation,
The jury has gone home, and
‘No. 22’.
and a book published two
the case is closed. History
A headline from the New York
years later, author and
suggests it is time to
historian Stella Randolf tells Herald, dated August 19, 1901
reopen it.
read: ‘Gustave Whitehead
of a steam-powered flight
Jacey Dare
made by Whitehead in 1899, travels half a mile in flying

Gustave Whitehead, pictured with his aeroplane ‘No. 21’, and his daughter and assistants

10

Unit 1 Thinking and reasoning

believable; and (b) whether they support the
headline claim. You cannot be expected to
know whether or not the claims are true unless
you have done some research. But it can be said
with some confidence that they are believable.
For one thing they could easily be checked.
As it happens, most if not all of the claims
in the first four paragraphs are basically true.
Firstly there are people who believe that
Whitehead flew planes successfully before
1903. (You only need to look up Whitehead
on the internet to see how many supporters
he has. It is hard to say whether they count as
‘aviation experts’ or ‘historians’, but we can
let that pass.) It is also true that Stella Randolf
wrote books and articles in which she refers to
numerous witnesses giving signed statements
that they saw Whitehead flying. There really
was a story in the New York Herald in 1901,
reporting a half-mile flight by Whitehead, and
quoting a witness as saying that the plane
‘worked perfectly’. The photograph of
Whitehead with his ‘No. 21’ is understood to
be genuine; and no one disputes that
Whitehead built aircraft. Lastly, it is a fact that
Whitehead was a poor German immigrant,
and it is thought that the Smithsonian had
some sort of agreement with the Wrights in
return for their donating the Flyer.
If all these claims are so believable, is the
headline believable too? No single one of the
claims would persuade anyone, but added
together they do seem to carry some weight.
That, however, is an illusion. Even collectively
the evidence is inadequate. Not one of the
claims is a first-hand record of a confirmed
and dated Whitehead flight pre-1903. All the
evidence consists of is a list of people who
said that Whitehead flew. Author Jacey Dare
reports that author Stella Randolf wrote that
Louis Daravich said that he flew with
Whitehead. Such evidence is inherently weak.
It is what lawyers call ‘hearsay’ evidence, and
in legal terms it counts for very little.

Here are three more negative points that
you could have made, and quite probably did
make. Firstly, the photograph of Whitehead’s
plane does not show it in the air. The Wrights’
Flyer, by contrast, is doing exactly what its
name implies: flying. ‘No. 21’ might have
flown. (Apparently some ‘experts’ have
concluded from its design that it was capable
of flight.) But that is not the same as a
photograph of it in flight; and had there been
such a photograph, surely Jacey Dare would
have used it in preference to one that shows
the machine stationary and on the ground.
The clear implication is that there is no
photograph of a Whitehead machine airborne.
Secondly, the New York Herald report is not
a first-hand account: it quotes a single
unnamed ‘witness’, but the reporter himself
clearly was not there, or he would have given
his own account. Thirdly Stella Randolf’s
article and book were published 34 years after
the alleged flight of ‘No. 21’, and the
testimony of Louis Daravich was not made
public until then either. Why? There are
many possible reasons; but one, all-tooplausible reason is that it simply wasn’t true.

An overstated conclusion
Another major weakness in Jacey Dare’s
argument is that she claims too much. The
evidence she provides does not give
sufficiently compelling grounds for rewriting
the record books. What can be said, however,
is that it raises a question mark over the
Wright brothers’ claim to fame. For even if the
argument fails to show that they were not the
first to fly, it doesn’t follow that they were.
Lack of evidence for something does not prove
that it is false, or that the opposite is true.
There is a way, therefore, to be a little more
positive about the document. We can interpret
it as doing no more than opening up a debate.
On that reading, the wording of the headline
is just down to journalistic style. If we

1.2 An introduction to critical thinking

11

understand it as a provocative or ‘punchy’ title
rather than a literal claim, and take the last
sentence of the article as the real conclusion,
then perhaps Jacey Dare has a more defensible
point. Maybe it is time to reopen the debate. If
that is all she is really saying, then she has a
stronger case. Or you may feel that even that is
going too far for the evidence available.
Whichever judgement you come to in the
end, you have now had a taste of critical
thinking, and in particular of two of its core
components: analysing (or interpreting) an
argument, and evaluating it. You have also
seen how the activity sections of the book
link up with the instructional part and
the commentaries.

Looking ahead
There are three critical thinking units in the
book, interspersed – and sometimes
overlapping – with the problem-solving units.
Unit 2 is entitled ‘Critical thinking: the basics’,
which is self-explanatory. It covers the main
concepts and methodologies of the discipline.
Unit 4 is given over to ‘Applied critical
thinking’, introducing longer and more

12

Unit 1 Thinking and reasoning

complex documents and additional concepts
such as evidence and credibility, inference,
explanation. Unit 7 is entitled: ‘Critical
reasoning: Advanced Level’. As the name
suggests, it moves into more challenging and
sometimes more technical territory. It draws
on some of the methodology of elementary
logic and formal decision making, and
concludes with two chapters on drawing
together the different strands of critical
thinking that have featured in the foregoing
parts of the book.

Summary
• Critical thinking consists of making
informed, evaluative judgements about
claims and arguments.
• The main strands of critical thinking are:
analysis (interpretation), evaluation and
further argument.
• Critical thinking is characterised by being:
fair and open-minded; active and informed;
sceptical; independent.

1.3 Solutions not problems
Some people do not like the word ‘problem’;
they say, ‘We don’t have problems, we only
have solutions.’ The word ‘problem’ is used in
different ways. It can mean something that is
causing us a difficulty. The word ‘problematical’
implies a situation where we cannot see an easy
solution to something. However, not all
problems are like this. In some cases we may
enjoy problems and solve them for fun: for
example, when reading a puzzle book or doing a
crossword. Most people have some sorts of
problem in their lives and many of these may
be solved with a little careful thought. The
problem solving we are talking about here is
based on logic; it is often related to
mathematics, in the sense of shape or number,
but does not require a high level of formal
mathematics to solve. It is largely based upon
the real world and is not abstract like much of
mathematics. Many people, from carpenters to
architects, from darts players to lawyers, use this
type of problem solving in their everyday lives.
On the face of it, critical thinking and
problem solving might appear as quite
separate disciplines. Most critical thinking
questions are primarily textual whilst many
problem-solving questions contain numerical
information. However, the skills used,
especially in the application of logic, are
quite similar and certainly complementary.
Scientists, politicians and lawyers will
frequently use both verbal and numerical
data in proposing and advancing an
argument and in drawing conclusions.
One of the reasons why the two disciplines
may be thought of as separate is in the nature
of thinking skills examination papers, which
often present the tests with clear divisions
between critical thinking (CT) and problem

solving (PS). Some of this is due to the nature
of short multiple-choice questions which
mainly deal with testing sub-skills rather than
looking at the full real-world application of
thinking skills. However, there are areas where
a more rounded evaluation is carried out,
such as the Cambridge A2 papers, BMAT data
analysis and inference, and in Unit 2 of the
AQA syllabus. Some of the questions in both
disciplines will be seen to be ‘hybrid’ where,
for example, you may be asked to draw a
conclusion or asked about further evidence
when presented with a set of numerical data.
Although many of the skills used in problem
solving in the real world are mathematical in
nature, much of this mathematics is at a
relatively elementary level, and needs little
more than the basic arithmetical operations
taught at elementary school. In fact, many
problem-solving tasks do not need arithmetic
at all. The origins of problem solving as part of
a thinking skills examination lie in the
processes used by scientists to investigate and
analyse. These were originally defined by
Robert J. Sternberg (Beyond IQ: A Triarchic Theory
of Human Intelligence, Cambridge University
Press, 1985) and can be summarised as:
• relevant selection: the ability to identify
what is important in a mass of data, and
thus to recognise what is important in
solving the problem in hand
• finding procedures: the ability to put
together pieces of information in an
appropriate way and thus to discover the
route to a solution of a problem
• identifying similarity: the ability to
recognise when new information is similar
to old information and thus to be able to
understand it better and more quickly.

1.3 Solutions not problems

13

Problem solving in early thinking skills
exams was firmly founded on these three
basic processes. The BMAT and TSA syllabuses
still refer to them explicitly. In the Cambridge
examinations, the three basic processes have
been expanded into a wider range of skills
which are tested at AS Level using multiplechoice questions and at Advanced Level with
longer, more open-ended questions which
can draw on several of the basic skills. For
example, the problem-solving category of
‘searching for a solution’ is one of the strands
of ‘finding procedures’.
Unit 3 of this book is entitled ‘Problem
solving: basic skills’ and deals with these
extended skills. The chapter structure is firmly
based on the problem-solving skills defined in
the Cambridge syllabus. Unit 5, ‘Advanced
problem solving’, deals with the extension to
Advanced Level and wider-ranging questions.
Questions at this level will generally include
the use of several of the basic skills. This covers
the analysis of more complex data sets, and
mathematical modelling and investigation.
These questions have open, rather than
multiple-choice, answers. Unit 6, ‘Problem
solving: further techniques’, deals mainly with
mathematical techniques which may be useful
in examinations at all levels.
The end-of-chapter assignments have often
been left open-ended rather than framed as
multiple-choice questions. This is so you will
have to solve the problem, rather than
eliminating answers or guessing. Some of the
activities and questions are marked as ‘harder’
and are intended to stretch candidates.
Here is a ‘taster’ problem to start with. It is
certainly not trivial, but illustrates the essence
of problem solving. The problem contains
only three relevant numbers and the only
mathematics required is the ability to add,
subtract and divide some small two-digit
numbers. Solving the problem requires no
specialised knowledge, either of techniques or
skills, just clear thinking.

14

Unit 1 Thinking and reasoning

Activity
Marina is selling tickets on the door for a
university play. It costs $11 for most people to
buy a ticket, but students only have to pay $9.
Just after the play starts, she remembers that
she was supposed to keep track of the number
of students in the audience. When she counts
the takings, there is a profit of $124.
How many people in the audience are
students?
A 2   B 3   C 4   D 5   E 6

Commentary
The $124 is made up of a number of $11 tickets
plus a number of $9 tickets. We need to find
out what multiples of 11 and 9 will add to 124.
We can do this systematically by subtracting
multiples of 11 and dividing the remainder by
9. For example, if there were one audience
member paying the full ticket price, there
would have been $113 from students. This is
not a multiple of 9, so cannot be correct. We
can list the possibilities in a table:
Number of
full-fee payers

Amount paid

Remainder
from $124

1

$11

$113

2

$22

$102

3

$33

$91

4

$44

$80

5

$55

$69

6

$66

$58

7

$77

$47

8

$88

$36

9

$99

$25

10

$110

$14

We found the first multiple of 9 with 8 fullprice payers: $124 − $88 = $36, which means
there were 4 students paying $9. We carried
on checking, just in case there were other
solutions. There weren’t any, so C (4)
is the correct answer. In practice, most of
the working could be done mentally as it is
quite simple, so the problem could be solved
quite quickly.
Problems you will meet later in the book
will have similarities to this in that they are
based on realistic scenarios and reflect the
processes needed to function efficiently in
much of employment.
The challenges of problem solving are, in
principle, no different from doing a puzzle
such as Sudoku in a magazine and many are
the type of thing some people will do for fun.
Solving such a challenge is a rewarding and

enjoyable experience and one which can help
you with many things in both your home
and working life.

Summary
• Problem solving is about the use of logic,
often including simple mathematics,
to address real-life situations and aid
decision making.
• The fundamental skills of problem solving
are: selecting relevant data, finding
appropriate procedures to solve problems
and comparing data in different forms.
• Learning to solve problems successfully
develops skills which are useful in everyday
life: at home, in education and at work.

1.3 Solutions not problems

15

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

2.1 Claims, assertions,
statements

A claim or assertion is an expression that is
supposedly true. It may be spoken or written,
or sometimes just thought.
We have to say ‘supposedly true’ because
obviously not all claims and assertions are true.
Some are deliberate lies; some are based on
mistaken belief. There are also some claims
which, as we shall see, are not straightforwardly
true or false, but can still be asserted, or denied.
(A denial is a kind of assertion, an assertion that
something is not so.)
Here are three illustrative examples:

or assertion could also be made by sketching
and labelling a map showing the two
countries next to one another.
Since [A], [B] and [C] are all claims, all three
can be judged to be true or false. You may not
know whether a particular claim is true, but at
least it makes sense to say that it is; or that you
agree or disagree with it. It makes no sense to
say that a question or command is true.

[A] Angola shares a border with Namibia.
[B] The dinosaurs were cold-blooded.
[C] Top bankers earn too much money.
All three sentences are statements. ‘Statement’
here is used in the grammatical sense to
distinguish between sentences that usually
express claims and those which are used to
ask questions or give commands. If you want
a more formal grammatical term, the three
sentences are all declaratives (or declarative
sentences), as opposed to interrogatives
(questions) or imperatives (commands).
It is important to keep in mind the
distinction between an actual sentence – a
string of words – and what is expressed by a
sentence: the claim. A claim can usually be
made in many different ways. For example, [A]
could just as well have been expressed by the
sentence:
[A1] Angola and Namibia are
immediate neighbours.
The wording is different but the claim is
practically the same. Arguably the same claim

16

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

Fact and opinion
Claims can be divided roughly into those that
state facts and those that express opinions.
This is a useful distinction, but it needs some
clarification.

Activity
Look again at the three expressions above,
[A], [B] and [C]. They are all grammatical
statements. They all express claims. Discuss
how, if at all, they differ from each other.

Commentary
A fact is a true statement. Of the three
examples, the first, [A], is a fact. What is more,

it is a known or an established fact. You can
check it by looking in an atlas, or going there
and crossing the border. Some people may not
be aware of the fact, or even mistakenly think
something different; but that doesn’t in any
way alter the fact. If someone says, ‘No, these
two countries do not share a border,’ they are
wrong, and that’s all there is to it.
Note that stating a fact is not the same as
claiming it – or making a factual claim. You
can state a fact only if it really is a fact. But
you can claim that something is a fact and be
mistaken, or even be lying. Similarly, you can
claim to know something and be mistaken.
But you can’t actually know something that
isn’t true. You can only think you know it.
Statement [B] that dinosaurs were coldblooded is a claim to fact. But unlike [A], it is
not a known fact, by the author or by
anybody else. Scientific opinion on the
subject is divided, with grounds for claiming
either that the dinosaurs were cold-blooded
(like modern reptiles), or that they were
warm-blooded (like birds and mammals). The
best we can therefore say of this claim is that
it is a belief (or judgement or opinion); and
unless or until there is more factual evidence
available, it will remain so.
This does not mean, however, that this
sentence is neither true nor false. For either
the dinosaurs were cold-blooded or they
weren’t. Scientists may never know the truth,
but the truth exists and is there to be
discovered – even if it has to wait for the
invention of a time machine!
The third claim, [C], is purely an opinion.
Two people can disagree as to whether it is
true or not, and neither of them is necessarily
wrong. It comes down to what they think or
believe to be a reasonable wage, and/or what
they think of as ‘too much’. To say that the
sentence is true just means that you agree
with it, or assent to it. And to say that it is
false means you disagree. It can be ‘true’ in
your opinion at the same time as being ‘false’
in someone else’s.

Another way to distinguish this claim
from the other two claims is to say that it is
purely subjective. That means that its truth is
decided by each individual person – or
subject – who thinks about it. This is in
contrast to the first two, which are objective.
They are true or false regardless of what
anyone thinks or knows. The fact that the
truth is hidden does not mean that there is
no fact to be discovered.

Value judgements
Claims like [C], that something or someone is
good, bad, better, nice, nasty, greedy, too rich,
underpaid, and so on, are also called value
judgements, for the obvious reason that they
are opinions about the perceived value or
worth or rightness or wrongness of things. It is
not a value judgement to claim that dinosaurs
had cold blood. Nor would it be a value
judgement to claim that some bank bosses
earn more in a week than an average worker
earns in a lifetime. For these are matters of fact
which can be quantified and verified – or
falsified, as the case may be – for example, by
comparing the earnings of actual people.
It becomes a value judgement if you claim
that there is something ‘wrong’ or ‘excessive’
or ‘obscene’ about a level of earnings; or if
you say that, on the contrary, it is ‘right’ for
such successful and talented individuals to
get huge rewards. It might be difficult to
justify a claim that such huge pay
differentials are ‘right’; but in the end it
remains a matter of opinion or belief; and
people may differ in their opinions.
When someone says, therefore, that a value
judgement is true (or false), they are using the
words in a broad sense to mean something like
‘true (or false) in my opinion’, or ‘true (or false)
for me’.

Predictions and probabilities
Another special kind of claim is a prediction. A
prediction is a claim that something may or
may not be true because it is still in the future,

2.1 Claims, assertions, statements

17

or is as yet unverified. For example, someone
might claim, at a certain time and place:
[D] There’s going to be a storm in the next
24 hours.
If there is a storm within one day of the
sentence being spoken, then you can say,
looking back, that the prediction (or forecast)
was correct. But you cannot, even with
hindsight, say that the prediction was a fact
when it was made, because at the time of
making it, it was not yet known to be true.
Even when a claim cannot be made with
certainty, it can often be made with some
degree of probability. If you are playing a game
with five dice, and need five sixes with your
next and final throw, it is a fairly safe
prediction that you won’t win, because the
chances of throwing five sixes all at once are
very low. But it is not impossible. On average,
five sixes will come up once in every 7776 (65)
throws. The claim that you will lose, therefore,
has a high probability of being a correct
prediction, but it is not a fact. Similarly, if
someone said after you had thrown (and lost):
‘I knew you wouldn’t win,’ you could correctly
reply (as a critical thinker): ‘You didn’t know it.
You predicted it correctly, that’s all.’

Hypotheses
Strictly speaking, many of the claims that
scientists treat as fact should be understood
as probabilities of a very high order. These are

18

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

often referred to as hypotheses, even when
they are generally accepted as true.
Take the prediction that, if a dart and an
empty drink can are dropped simultaneously
from an equal height (under ordinary
atmospheric conditions), the dart will land
first. This claim is made on the grounds that,
whenever two such objects are dropped, the
result is always the same – or always has been
the same – so that it is entirely reasonable to
expect it to go on being the same in the future.
The observed result is explained by the general
principle that thin, arrow-shaped objects
encounter less air resistance than bulkier ones,
allowing the former to accelerate more rapidly
under the same force (in this case gravity) than
the latter.

The hypothesis has been so well tested that
the probability of such a claim ever being
wrong is practically non-existent. We call it a
‘hypothesis’, rather than an absolute
certainty, because conceivably the laws of
physics may not be the same in the far,
unknowable future, or in all possible worlds.
Besides, there have been many scientific
beliefs in the past that no one seriously
doubted, but that have had to be revised
because of later discoveries. One of the
best-known examples is the belief that the
Sun circled the Earth, or actually rose each
morning from beneath the Earth and travelled
across the sky. It was widely accepted by
astronomers before the time of Copernicus.
More recently, Albert Einstein’s claim that

nothing could exceed the speed of light
seemed unchallengeable until, in 2011, a
team of scientists at the Large Hadron Collider
claimed to have measured a tiny subatomic
particle – a neutrino – travelling fractionally
faster. Their measurements have yet to be
confirmed, and may have been proved wrong
by the time you are reading this page. But
whilst any uncertainty remains, Einstein’s
assertion is still just a hypothesis, and hence a
claim, not a fact.

Recommendations
Recommendations or suggestions are claims
of yet another sort. Here is one example:
[E] The wages and bonuses of bankers
should be capped.
This may seem quite similar to [C]: the claim
that top bankers earn too much. Both express
a similar sentiment, and both are opinions
rather than hard facts. However, there is an
important difference. [C] is an observation. It
describes a situation as the author sees it: the
way things are in his or her opinion. [E], in
contrast, is a claim about how things ought to
be, or what the author thinks should be done
in response to the situation.
Recommendations, like value judgements,
are not straightforwardly true or false. Two
people – even two people who agree about
[C] – may disagree about whether the
recommendation to cap wages is the right
way to deal with what they see as excessive
earnings. Neither of the two will be factually
wrong in their judgement. If one person says
that it is ‘true’ that bankers’ wages should be
capped, it just means that he considers it to
be a good idea. If another says it is ‘false’, she
is claiming it is a bad idea.

Grammatical note
We saw earlier in the chapter that claims
typically take the form of statements, or
declarative sentences. In some cases, however,
other grammatical forms can be used.
Take [C] again. A similar point could be made
by ‘asking’:
[C1] How disgusting are bankers’ wages?
‘Asking’ is in quotation marks because [C1] is
not a genuine question but a rhetorical one.
(You could alternatively call it an exclamation,
and punctuate it with an exclamation mark.)
What defines a rhetorical question is that it is
not really in need of an answer: it is making
an assertion. In this case the assertion is:
[C2] Bankers’ wages are disgusting.

Summary
• In this chapter we have discussed and
analysed one of the most basic concepts
in critical thinking: claims. These are
also referred to as ‘assertions’ and
‘statements’.
• Several important kinds of claim have been
introduced. They include:
•
•
•
•
•
•

claims to fact
statements of opinion or belief
value judgements
predictions
hypotheses
recommendations.

There will be more discussion of all
of these kinds of claim in the coming
chapters.

2.1 Claims, assertions, statements

19

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Explain briefly, in your own words, the
difference between a claim and a fact.
2 Is there any significant difference between
a claim and an assertion? If so, how are
they different? If not, what do they have
in common?
3 For each of the five examples [A]–[E] in
this chapter, suggest two other claims that
have the same relation to the truth, but on
different subject matter.
4 The word ‘hypothesis’ has several close
relatives. Here are four:
•
•
•
•

20

conjecture
theory
guess
speculation

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

	In what way is each of these different from
the others? (You can use a dictionary to
help you answer the question.)
5 How would you define the following special
kinds of claim?
•
•
•
•
•
•

allegation
accusation
insinuation
confirmation
denial
verdict

6 The idea of claims is central to the
discipline of critical thinking. Why is
this so?
Answers and comments are on page 311.

2.2 Judging claims
When a claim is made, especially publicly, it
is natural to think we are being told the truth.
Most of the time we accept claims, especially
claims to fact, at face value. For instance, if
we read in the newspaper that there has been
a plane crash, we are entitled to assume that
such an event really has taken place. We
don’t jump to the conclusion that the
statement is false just because we have not
witnessed it ourselves. We hear the football
results, or baseball scores, and assume they
are correct, and not made up to please the
fans of some clubs. We get a weather forecast
telling us to expect heavy snow, and we plan
accordingly: we don’t ignore it just because it
is a prediction, and predictions aren’t facts.
Assuming that most of what we are told is
true is entirely reasonable. Indeed, it is
necessary for a normal life, and the
functioning of a modern democratic society.
If we questioned, or refused to believe,
everything we read or heard, life as we know
it would come to a standstill. That is why we
all have a responsibility to tell the truth; and
why people are understandably annoyed if
they are told something that is not true.
Everyone knows the story of The Boy Who
Cried ‘Wolf!’ or a story like it. The boy has a
bad habit of raising false alarms, in particular
frightening his community by shouting out
that a pack of wolves is approaching the
village. At first the villagers run to safety
whenever he does this. But after a while they
stop believing him, until the day comes when
a real wolf appears. By then, of course, the
boy has lost all credibility and his for-once
genuine warning is ignored. (You can work
out the ending yourself.)

The moral of the story is that truth and
trust are both important. People need to be
able to rely on what they are told most of the
time; and people who speak the truth need
others to believe them most of the time. But
that does not mean we should respond with
blind acceptance to everything that we read
and hear. Obviously we cannot assume that
just because something has been asserted – in
spoken, printed or any other form – it is true,
or we have to agree with it. People do make
false assertions not only with intent to
deceive, but also out of carelessness or
ignorance. Even when there is a core of truth
in what someone says, it may be exaggerated,
or over-simplified, or a mere approximation,
or a rough guess. There are many ways,
besides being plainly false, in which a claim
may be less than the whole truth.
None of this means that we should start
routinely doubting everything. But it does
mean we should keep an open and inquisitive
mind.

Justification
As you saw in the previous chapter, it is not
always possible to know whether a claim is
straightforwardly true or false. Knowledge
requires certainty and certainties are rare. In
the absence of certainty, the best evaluation
we can give of a claim or belief is to say
whether it is justified, or warranted. These two
words mean much the same as each other. A
warrant is a right or entitlement. We are
entitled to hold a belief, or to make a claim, if
there are strong grounds – for example,
evidence – to support it. Without such
grounds a claim is unwarranted (unjustified).

2.2 Judging claims

21

At first sight it may seem that truth and
justification amount to the same thing: a
claim is justified if it is true, and unjustified
(or unwarranted) if not. But neither of these
is correct. A claim can be true but unjustified
if the person making it does not have good
grounds for believing it – or in extreme cases
may not believe it at all. Suppose, for
example, a crime has been committed. The
victim (we’ll call her Vera) claims that her
neighbour (Nick) was the one who did it,
perhaps because she doesn’t like him, or
perhaps because she wants to see someone
convicted, and anyone will do. Other than
this she has no reason for making the
allegation, and certainly nothing that would
count as evidence. But then suppose it is
discovered that Nick, just as Vera has claimed,
is guilty of the crime! Would the discovery of
Nick’s guilt justify Vera’s accusation? No. It
would just be chance that the claim she had
made was true. Given her motives her claim
would still be a lie.
Conversely, a false claim can be justified in
some circumstances. Someone may make an
assertion on the basis of all the information
available at the time of making it. If that
information gives convincing grounds for the
claim, then it is fair to say that it is a justified
claim to have made, even if it later turns out
to be false on the basis of some new
information.
In other words, truth and justification are
different. Justification is provided by the
reasons that can be found and given for a
claim, but truth or falsity belong to the claim
itself. We may never know for certain whether
a particular claim is true, but we may be able to
say that there is sufficient evidence or grounds
or support to justify asserting it. Alternatively
we may say that a claim is unjustified, because
there are not sufficient grounds or support for
it, or because there are sufficient grounds to
cast doubt on it. This is different from saying
that it is actually false.

22

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

Judging which of these is the right way to
respond to a claim is at the heart of the
discipline of critical thinking, and is part of
what we mean by ‘evaluation’.

Activity
Recall the example in the last chapter: the
claim that the prehistoric dinosaurs were
cold-blooded. Two facts are often cited in
support of this:
[A] The dinosaurs were reptiles.
[B] Modern reptiles, e.g. snakes and
lizards, are all cold-blooded.
Discuss whether these two facts between
them justify the claim that the dinosaurs
were cold-blooded.

Commentary
The two facts give some support to the claim,
but only some. They are grounds for the
hypothesis that the dinosaurs were coldblooded inasmuch as they add some weight to
that side of the debate. If you knew nothing
else about dinosaurs, or reptiles, or evolution
generally, you might be tempted to accept the
grounds as sufficient. But it would be a big
step to take. For one thing it would mean
assuming that what is true of reptiles now
must have been true of reptiles 70 million
years ago, and earlier. It is not at all impossible
that there were once warm-blooded reptiles
running around, including some of the
dinosaurs; but that these reptiles became
extinct, leaving only the cold-blooded species
surviving today. (Being cold-blooded may
have given certain reptiles a survival
advantage over the warm-blooded ones.
Warm-blooded species use more energy than
those with cold blood, and food sources may
have become scarce.) This possibility alone
means that the assumption is questionable,
though not necessarily false.

So [A] and [B] on their own do not really
justify taking the hypothesis as fact. It could
be true, and many scientists consider it more
probable than the counter-claim that the
dinosaurs were warm-blooded. But there is no
proof one way or the other.

Standards
It should be noted that ‘justified’ is not an
all-or-nothing term like ‘true’ and ‘certain’. A
claim is either true or it is not. You may want
to object that some claims are partly true (or
partly false); or somewhere in between truth
and falsity. But in strict terms ‘true’ means ‘the
whole truth and nothing but the truth’, and
does not allow degrees or approximations. A
claim, on the other hand, can be more or less
justified according to the strength of the
supporting grounds and the context in which
the claim is made.
Here is a simple example. (A ‘marathon’,
officially defined, is a running race over
42.195 km. There are various explanations
and historical accounts for this rather
peculiar distance. You may like to do some
research and find out why. But for present
purposes what matters is that it is a fact.)

Activity
Let us suppose that Katya has just returned
from a training run of 42 km and announced
to her friends:
[C] I have just run a marathon.
Discuss whether her claim is justified (or
warranted), given that it is so close to the
truth. Is it in any sense ‘true’? Or is it
altogether ‘false’?

Commentary
The assertion is, strictly speaking, untrue.
Even if we allow that by ‘marathon’ Katya
means the marathon distance (rather than an
organised race), her claim is short of the whole

truth – by 195 metres. You may have thought
it was fair to say that Katya’s claim was nearly
true, or approximately true; but this is really
just a way of saying that Katya ran nearly a
marathon or approximately a marathon.
Indeed, it is completely true that Katya ran
nearly a marathon, even though [C], as it
stands, is not true.
Is [C] as it stands justified? That is a more
difficult question. It depends on the
circumstances or context in which it was
asserted. If it is just a conversational context,
which is what it sounds like, then it would be
plainly silly to call Katya a liar. However, if she
had to run at least one complete, officially
recognised marathon – perhaps in a certain
time – to pass some test, and she was counting
the training run as her qualifying run, then
we have to say that her claim is not justified.
What makes the difference is the standard of
accuracy or precision required.
The most familiar example of varying
standards of this kind is in the law. Take a
guilty verdict passed in a criminal trial. (A
verdict is a special kind of claim. You were
asked to define it in the assignment at the end
of Chapter 2.1.) Under the justice systems of
many countries, the UK included, a guilty
verdict is justified only if it can be proven
beyond reasonable doubt. That phrase sets the
standard. So, even if the jury are pretty sure
the defendant is guilty, but there is just a
small, lingering uncertainty, they must give a
verdict of not guilty – or in some countries an
‘open verdict’, or ‘unproven’. Similarly, those
who give evidence in a court are instructed
to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing
but the truth. This, too, sets a very high
standard on what counts as a justified or
warranted assertion.
By contrast, the standard required for a ‘not
guilty’ verdict is much lower: all that is
required is that there is some room for doubt –
at least in societies which hold the principle
that a person is innocent until proven guilty. In

2.2 Judging claims

23

a criminal case there is an imbalance between
the standards that must be met by the
prosecution and the defence respectively.
The ‘burden of proof’, it is often said, ‘lies with
the prosecution’.

The balance of probability
Outside the criminal law we may find
standards lower than proof being needed to
justify a claim or decision. For instance, in a
civil case, where both sides are treated
equally, a verdict is justified ‘on the balance
of probability’. Obviously it is much harder
to justify a claim beyond reasonable doubt
than on the balance of probability.
What this means is that there are degrees of
justification, depending on context. For
critical thinking it means that when we judge
a claim to be justified (warranted), or
unjustified (unwarranted), we need to qualify
the judgement by stating what standard we
are applying. Expressions like ‘wholly
(completely, entirely) justified’ are stronger
than ‘well supported’ or ‘highly likely’; and
‘unwarranted’ is stronger than ‘open to
question’ or ‘unlikely’. Choosing the right
qualification for the judgements we make
about claims and their justification is
one of the most important critical skills to
develop – arguably the most important.

Knowledge and certainty
With certainty, on the other hand, there are
no degrees. It is true that people often talk
about the degree of certainty that can be
given to some claim or other; but what they
really mean by this is the degree to which the
claim falls short of certainty. The claim that
you will never win the lottery is so highly
probable that it can be stated as a nearcertainty. But near-certainty is not certainty.
Likewise, you don’t know that you won’t win
the lottery. If everyone who bought a lottery
ticket claimed to know that they would not
win, sooner or later one of them would
be wrong!

24

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

However, this does not mean we can never
use the words ‘know’ or ‘certain’
appropriately. It is perfectly appropriate to say
of some claims that they are certain. The
truths of mathematics and logic are usually
spoken of as certainties. No one doubts that
7 + 5 = 12 or that a triangle has three sides, or
that an object cannot be red and black all over
at the same time. Claims like these are often
said to be true by definition. For example, ‘12’
just means the same as ‘the sum of 7 and 5’.
Also there are claims which are practically
certain even if they are not logically true. The
old favourite is that the sun will rise tomorrow
(as it has always done on previous days). It
would be foolish to dispute this claim, despite
the fact that some freak of nature could
conceivably spell the end of the solar system in
the next 24 hours. If you had to bet on winning
the lottery or the sun not rising, you would bet
on winning the lottery every time!

Complex claims
Sentences such as ‘Katya just ran a marathon’
or ‘Dinosaurs were reptiles’ express simple
claims. The following, by contrast, are
complex sentences, each expressing two or
more connected claims:
[D]	Katya just ran a marathon and
completed the distance in under four
hours.
[E]	The dinosaurs were reptiles, yet they
were warm-blooded.
[F]	Sea levels are rising around the world
because global warming is melting the
polar ice caps.
[G]	Many parts of the world will soon be
submerged if nothing is done to reverse
climate change.

Grammatical note
A simple sentence, when it becomes part of a
complex sentence, is called a ‘clause’. Words
or phrases which express the relation between
clauses are called ‘connectives’: for example,

‘and’, ‘because’, ‘if’.

Activity
What difference does it make to the way we
judge a claim if it is complex rather than
simple?
For each of the examples [D]–[G] discuss
the conditions that would have to be met to
justify the whole claim.

Commentary
When assessing complex claims we also have
to take note of the connective, and the
relation it expresses between the parts.
In the case of [D] the job is quite
straightforward. The connective is ‘and’. This
means that [D] as a whole is true if Katya did
just run a marathon and that she ran it in
under four hours. So, if either of these claims
is at all questionable, [D] is not fully justified.
In [E] the connective is ‘yet’ which makes
[E] a slightly more complex assertion than [D].
Again the two connected claims both have to
be true: firstly that dinosaurs were reptiles, and
secondly that they had warm blood. But the
use of the connective ‘yet’ also suggests that
there is something surprising or unusual in
this: that the second claim is true despite the
first being true. The implication is that reptiles
are usually, or normally, cold-blooded; and if
this is not the case then the use of ‘yet’ is not
really justified, even if both the claims are true
in themselves.
[F] also has more to it than just the two
claims. [F] is an explanation, or more
precisely a causal explanation, as indicated by
the connective ‘because’. Its author not only
asserts that sea levels are rising and that
global warming is melting the ice, but also
that the first is caused by the second. If we are
not satisfied that all three parts are true, then
we are not justified in asserting [F]. (There is
more about explanation later in the book.)

[G] is another complex claim, and one
which is quite tricky to analyse accurately.
First of all it is not claiming either that parts
of the world will soon be underwater, or that
nothing will be done about climate change.
[G] is what we call a conditional claim, or a
hypothetical. We will also be returning to
these later in the book; but for now all you
need to note is that a conditional is a claim
that if one thing is true, then so is another.
For instance, if nothing is done about
climate change, then parts of the world will
be underwater. If nothing is done and the
prediction turns out to a false alarm, then
[G] as a whole is untrue.

Strong and weak claims
Before concluding the chapter, there is one
more important distinction that needs to be
made. Some claims are stronger than others.
The importance of this is that a strong claim
is harder to justify than a weak claim. A
‘strong’ claim is one which says a lot, and/or
says it very plainly or forcefully. A ‘weak’
claim in comparison is more moderate: it says
less, and/or qualifies what it says.
Suppose for example that whoever asserted
[G] had said instead:
[H] Whole regions of the world will soon be
under water as a direct result of manmade climate change.
This is a very strong claim. It doesn’t say ‘may
be . . .’, or ‘are at risk of being . . .’, or anything
else that softens the impact. It says,
categorically, that whole regions will be
flooded. The whole of [H] is stronger still,
because it also claims, just as categorically,
what the direct cause will be. [H] does not pull
any punches. Moreover, it is clearly implying
that climate change is taking place, and that it
is man-made – a claim that some people deny
or question. It would not make sense to add
that this would be the cause if it were not also
claimed to be a reality. All of these factors add
up to make [H] a strong and far-reaching claim.

2.2 Judging claims

25

Because it says a lot, and says it so forcefully, it
would take a lot to justify it in full.
One important point to add about this
distinction is that if a claim is very strong it
is easier to challenge, or to cast doubt on,
because there is more, potentially, to find
fault with. [H] could be made easier to justify
if it were weakened, or modified, for example
like this:
[H1] Some parts of the world could one day
be under water, and if so man-made
climate change may be at least partly
to blame.
Obviously [H1] needs less to justify it than [H],
and would be easier to defend if a denier of
climate change wants to attack or disprove it.
Words or phrases such as ‘some’, ‘could’, ‘may’
and ‘one day’ are weaker terms than ‘whole’,
‘will’ and ‘soon’; and partial blame is easier to
pin on something than direct cause. Whereas
you need something approaching proof to
justify [H], you need only danger signs to justify
[H1]. But then [H1] does not have the impact
that [H] has. It is not the same claim any more.

problem-solving skills than men. Even so, it
would be a generalisation, and a vague one
too; and vague generalisations are hard
to justify.
The opposite of the word ‘general’ is the
word ‘particular’. It would not be a
generalisation to select a particular woman,
or group of women, and talk about their
thinking skills. Imagine that two teams – one
all female, another all male – competed in a
problem-solving competition, and the
adjudicator concluded at the end that:
[J] The women (in the women’s team)
were more organised in their thinking
than the men.
This would be a particular claim, not a general
one, stating that these particular women, on
this particular occasion, were superior to the
men – at certain particular tasks. Claim [J]
would be justified if the women won the
competition. But no sort of general claim
could be made on the strength of [J],
especially not [I]. (You will meet up with this
topic again in Chapter 2.10.)

Generalisations
A generalisation is a claim that applies very
widely – sometimes universally: that is, in
every single case. For example:
[I] Women are better problem solvers
than men.
This is a strong claim because it is about
men and women generally. It is especially
strong if it is taken literally to mean that all
women are better at problem solving than
all men. Clearly that would be unwarranted,
since it would take just one or two counterexamples to prove it false. However, [I]
could be understood to be the less sweeping
claim that on balance women exhibit better

26

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

Summary
• We have discussed what is meant by
justifying a claim, and considered different
standards of justification.
• We have looked at simple and complex
claims.
• It has been shown that strong claims are
harder to justify than weak claims.
• We have seen the distinction between
general and particular claims.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Invent a story or scenario in which a claim
is made that is true but unwarranted.
2 Give an example of a claim that you
consider to be:
a justified on the balance of probability
b justified beyond reasonable doubt
c completely justified; certain.
	In each case say why your claim matches
the description.

3 Compare these two claims:
[A] Polar bears will be extinct by the
middle of the century.
[B] Polar bears are an endangered
species.
	One of these claims is stronger than the
other. Which one is it, and why?
Answers and comments are on page 311.

2.2 Judging claims

27

2.3 Argument
An argument is a complex claim used to
organise and express certain kinds of
reasoning. It is composed of two or more
claims, one of which is a conclusion; the others
are reasons for the conclusion. A good
argument is one in which the conclusion
follows from the reasons, or is justified by the
reasons.
This doesn’t simply mean that the
conclusion comes after the reasons. ‘Following
from’, in the context of an argument, means
that the conclusion is adequately supported by
the reasons. If the reasons are true, and the
argument is a good one, then the conclusion
must be true as well. Obviously a false
conclusion cannot follow, in this sense, from
true reasons.
In practical terms arguments exist for the
purpose of persuading others, or of satisfying
oneself, that a particular claim is warranted.

An example
Until a few hundred years ago it was generally
believed that the world was flat. This was a
natural belief to have because the Earth’s
surface looks flat. But people had also observed
(and been puzzled by the fact) that ships
sailing away from land appeared to get lower
and lower in the water, as if they were sinking,
and appeared to rise up again as they
approached land. Some argued – from this
and other observations – that the Earth’s
surface could not be flat, but was curved. They
drew this conclusion because if the Earth were
flat, a ship would just appear to get smaller
and smaller until it was too small to see. The
argument went like this:
[1a] Ships appear to sink out of sight as they
sail away. So the Earth cannot be flat.

28

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

This is a very simple argument. It consists of
just one reason and a conclusion, and the
connective ‘so’. The words ‘therefore’ or ‘so’
are typically used before the conclusion of an
argument, and are often called argument
indicators (or inference indicators) for that
reason.
However, this is not the only way to
construct this argument. It could have been
written:
[1b] The Earth cannot be flat because (since /
given that / . . .) ships appear to sink out
of sight as they sail away from land.
Note that the connective in [1b] reverses the
order of the claims. Words like ‘because’ and
‘since’ are therefore sometimes referred to as
reason indicators (or premise indicators).
(‘Premise’ is a more formal word for a reason in
an argument.)
Note also that it is not necessary to include
an argument indicator at all: the reasoning
may be just as clear without it. For example:
[1c] The Earth cannot be flat. Ships appear
to sink out of sight as they sail away.

The form of an argument
In each of these examples the argument is
expressed and/or arranged differently. But it is
still the same argument, with the same reason
and same conclusion. Because there are many
ways in which an argument can be expressed,
it is convenient to have one standard form for
setting arguments out. The customary way to
do this, both in logic and critical thinking, is
to place the reasons in a list, and to separate
them from the conclusion by a horizontal
line. The line performs the same function as

words such as ‘therefore’ or ‘so’ in natural
language reasoning. We can set out this
simple argument as follows:
[1] Ships appear to sink out of sight as they
sail away.
The Earth cannot be flat.
In a formal argument like this, the reason or
reasons are also known as ‘premises’. The word
‘premise’ is derived from Latin and means
‘put before’.
[1a], [1b] and [1c] are just three out of many
ways of expressing [1] in ordinary language.
[1] is the standard way. Reconstructing an
argument in a standard form helps to make the
reasoning clear and assists with its subsequent
evaluation. It also helps with the identification
of arguments. Obviously the exercise is
unnecessary when an argument is as short and
as plain as this one. But with more complex
reasoning, which you will encounter as you
progress through the chapters, formal
reconstruction is a valuable tool.

Arguing back
Of course, not everyone has to accept an
argument. Sometimes, even when you have
given your reasons, people may still disagree
with your conclusion. This certainly happened
hundreds of years ago when the first ‘RoundEarthers’ began trying to persuade people that
the world was spherical, not flat.
There may have been conversations like this.
[2]	
Kris:	Did you know it’s been proven
that the Earth is a huge ball
hanging in space?
		
Bart:	Don’t be ridiculous. Anyone can
see the Earth is flat.
		
Kris:	It can’t be flat. If you just let me
explain . . .
		
Bart:	There’s nothing to explain. All
you have to do is use your eyes.
		
Kris:	I am using my eyes, and they tell
me the Earth is round.

		
Bart (in a lowered voice):
			Then I’ll tell you something. If
you go around talking this kind
of nonsense, someone is going
to lock you up and throw away
the key. Or tie you to a post and
set you on fire.
		
Kris:	But just listen –
		
Bart:	No, you listen. The Earth is flat.
		
Kris:	It’s round.
		
Bart:	Flat. F-L-A-T, flat!
		
Kris:	ROUND . . .

Activity
[1] and [2] are both called ‘arguments’. But
do they have anything else in common
besides answering to the same word?
Discuss how you would define an
argument to include both the first kind and
the second.

Commentary
The problem with the English word
‘argument’ is that it has several meanings.
Two of them are given by the following
dictionary entry:
argument (noun)
 a reason or reasons supporting a
1
conclusion; a case made for or against a
point of view. 2 a debate or dispute,
especially a heated one; quarrel; row.
As you can see, example [1] is an argument of
the first sort whilst [2] is an example of the
second. The main difference is that [2] is a
dialogue engaging two or more people. It may
involve some reasoning from one side or the
other, or both, but it need not. In [2] there is
very little reasoned argument. Kris tries to
explain his position, but his opponent shouts
him down. The two speakers are mostly just
exchanging opinions, without giving any
developed reasons to back them up.

2.3 Argument

29

However, it would be wrong to think that
the two meanings of ‘argument’ are completely
divorced from one another. As stated at the
beginning of the chapter, arguments typically
exist to persuade, and it is clear that in a dispute
like [2] each of the participants is trying to
change the mind of the other. In [1] there is no
context given, but the argument being made is
obviously aimed at some real or imagined
opposition. Why else would its author feel any
need to give reasons to support the claim? You
don’t hear people nowadays arguing that the
Earth is spherical, because it is no longer
disputed. Arguments of the first kind occur
typically when some opposition to the
conclusion has been expressed or is anticipated.
Conversely, most arguments of the second
kind have some elements of reason-giving in
them. Even in [2], which is predominantly a
quarrel, both men are arguing on the grounds
of what they claim to see – the evidence of
their senses.
Bart:	Anyone can see the Earth is flat.
Kris:	. . . my eyes . . . tell me the Earth is
round.
If we wanted to interpret Bart’s words as an
argument, we could write it as follows:
[3]	The Earth looks flat (to me); therefore it
is flat.
You may not think much of this argument now
because you happen to know that, because of
the size of the Earth, appearances are
misleading. The Earth does look flat. Therefore
the premise of [3] is true; but the conclusion is
not. So the conclusion does not follow from the
reason. [3] is an argument, but it is a bad one.
In some textbooks the impression is given
that critical thinking is concerned only with
arguments of type [1], and not with argument
in the sense of dispute. But for reasons just
given, we cannot understand the full meaning
and purpose of arguments if we ignore their
most obvious context. Much of our reasoning –
perhaps all of it – arises in or from differences

30

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

of belief or opinion. An argument that the Earth
is not flat makes practical sense only if
someone – past or present – thinks that it is
flat, or needs proof that it is.

Evaluating argument
We have seen then that an argument is a
complex claim, made up of simpler claims –
the reasons (premises) and the conclusion. It
is a good argument if the reason or reasons
justify the conclusion. It is a poor argument if
they do not. Evaluating argument means
distinguishing good ones from bad ones.
Much of the content of this book is about the
critical evaluation of reasoned argument. But
here is a taste of what it is like.

Activity
We have established that [3] is a weak
argument; a bad one. Compare it with [1]:
the argument that since ships appear to sink
out of sight as they sail away, the Earth
cannot be flat. Is [1] a good argument, or
not? Would it persuade you that the Earth’s
surface was curved if you had previously
believed it was flat?

Commentary
Argument [1] might seem like a strong
argument now, because we already accept that
the Earth is not flat. But, as we also know from
history, arguments like [1] were not enough to
convince the general public straight away.
People needed more reasons if they were
going to give up a belief that had persisted for
centuries. Judged critically it becomes clear
that [1] is no better than [3], because [1] also
argues from appearances. If the flat
appearance of the Earth does not mean that it
is flat, then surely the appearance of ships
sinking does not prove that they are dropping
out of sight; nor that the curvature of the
Earth is the cause of this appearance. It could
be some kind of optical illusion; a kind of
mirage perhaps. It isn’t a mirage: it is perfectly

true both that ships appear to sink and that
the Earth’s curvature is the reason. But we
know that now independently of the argument.
The single reason given in [1] does not, on its
own, establish its conclusion.

More reasons
For an effective argument we usually need more
than one reason. Imagine you were sent back in
time several hundred years and had to convince
people that the Earth was not flat. What would
you take with you: pictures from space; stories
of people who have sailed round the world?
These would seem like a good start. Armed with
such evidence, you could supplement [1] and
thereby make it stronger, for example:
[4]	Ships appear to sink lower and lower the
further they are from land. But they
cannot actually be sinking, or they would
not come back. Also, sailors have proved
that if you set off in one general direction,
for example east or west, and keep going,
you eventually arrive back where you
started from. These facts show that the
Earth cannot be flat. Besides,
photographs have been taken from space
that show the Earth’s curvature.
Here four reasons are given in support of the
conclusion. The conclusion is introduced by
the phrase: ‘These facts show that’, another
way of saying ‘so’. Three of the reasons are
given first; then the conclusion; then a
further, seemingly indisputable, reason. So
the structure of the argument is as follows:
Ships appear to sink as they sail away.
They can’t actually be sinking or they wouldn’t
come back.
Ships sail in one direction but return to their
starting point.
Pictures from space show the curvature of the
Earth.
The Earth cannot be flat.

Obviously [4] is a much stronger argument
than [1]. Whether it actually convinces its
audience will still depend on their willingness
to accept the evidence. But if they understand
and believe the claims you are making, then
it would be irrational of them not to accept
the conclusion also.
Of course, the ‘if’ is a big one. In all
probability the audience from that time would
not accept your claims because they would not
understand them. What could pictures from
space mean to a 14th-century fisherman? They
would lock you up – or worse – and carry on
believing what they had always believed and
could see with their own eyes: a flat Earth
surrounded by flat sea.
This is why ‘claim’ is the right word for the
statements that appear in arguments. Some of
the claims made in an argument may be
known facts, but others may be forecasts,
suggestions, beliefs or opinions. Claims may
also be false. It is perfectly possible to construct
an argument from false claims, either out of
ignorance, or out of deceit. (That is probably
what people hundreds of years ago would have
suspected you of doing, as they slammed the
dungeon door.)
This point is important in understanding
what argument is. An argument presents
reasons and a conclusion. It does not
guarantee that either the reasons or the
conclusion are true. It is still an argument even
if the claims in it turn out to be false.

Grammatical note
It was noted in Chapter 2.1 that claims can
sometimes take the form of rhetorical
questions, or other sentence types:
imperatives, or exclamations. When
reconstructing an argument in which one or
more of the sentences is not a declarative
sentence, but is making a claim nonetheless,
it is good practice to transform it into a
grammatical statement.

2.3 Argument

31

Summary
• An argument is a complex construction
in which one sentence, the conclusion, is
claimed to follow from another (or others)
which are reasons.
• A more technical word for a reason, in the
context of an argument, is ‘premise’. In this
book both terms are used, and have the
same meaning unless otherwise stated.

• A good argument is one in which the
conclusion follows from the premises,
meaning that if the premises are true then
the conclusion should be true too, because
of the truth of the premises. (But there is a
lot more to be said about this point in later
chapters.)

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Think of a suitable conclusion that you
could add to the following to make it into
an argument:
 olice forces the world over face a
P
dilemma. On top of dealing with
murders and other major incidents,
they have to divide their limited time
and finite resources between tackling
minor crimes such as shoplifting and
street robbery, and traffic offences such
as speeding or careless driving. Of
course, the consequences of speeding
can be as bad as or worse than the theft
of a wallet or a mobile phone. They can
be fatal. But there is a big difference of
another sort. The thief intends to do
harm and to deprive people of their
rightful property, whereas any harm
that is done by a car-driver, however
serious, is usually accidental.

32

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

2 Think of one or two reasons that could be
used to support the following viewpoints,
and use them to construct arguments:
a It is wrong to charge foreign students
higher fees than other students.
b Private cars with fewer than four
occupants should be banned from city
centres.
c The stars of football, baseball and other
popular sports deserve every cent of
the millions that they are paid.
3 Find a short argument published in a
newspaper or magazine or on the internet.
Copy it down and underline its conclusion.
4 Write a short argument of your own
consisting of two or three reasons and a
conclusion that they support.
Answers and comments are on page 311.

2.4 Identifying arguments
Before an argument can be reconstructed and/
or evaluated it must first be established that it
is an argument. This can be harder than it
sounds, especially if the argument is a poor
one. In a good argument the conclusion
follows from the reasons. In a bad argument it
does not follow: the reasons do not justify the
conclusion. It is this which makes it a bad
argument. But how bad does an argument
have to be before we decide that it is not an
argument at all? Establishing that some piece
of text is an argument may come down to
deciding whether or not the author meant or
intended one of the claims to be a conclusion,
and the others to be reasons. Judging an
author’s intention, from a text alone, is not a
very exact science!
Matters are made easier if the conclusion or
reasons are marked by indicators such as
‘therefore’, ‘so’, ‘since’ and ‘because’. However,
these connectives have other functions in the
language beside signalling argument. They
occur frequently, for example, in explanations
(see Chapter 4.2). Just finding two sentences
joined by ‘so’ or ‘since’ does not automatically
identify a reasoned argument. Think of the
words of the rock ballad:
But since you’ve been gone
I can breathe for the first time . . .
There is no argument here. ‘Since’ in the song
means ‘ever since’, which is different from the
meaning it has in front of a premise.
Besides, as stated in Chapter 2.3, there are
plenty of examples of natural-language
arguments which contain no connectives. An
argument may just be conveyed by a pair or
sequence of sentences. Obviously not every
sequence of sentences is an argument. All too

often it is left to the reader to interpret how a
text is best understood.
For example, it is not an argument to say:
[1]	Photographs from space show the
Earth’s surface as curved. The curvature
does not show when a photograph is
taken from ground level.
How we can establish that [1] is not an
argument is by asking if either of the two
claims supports the other, or states a reason
for accepting the other. Despite what was
said just now about indicators, a partial test
can be applied by inserting ‘therefore’ or ‘so’
between the sentences and asking: Does it
make sense? If it doesn’t make sense, then
there is no argument – although the converse
does not necessarily apply. Here is the test
applied to [1]:
[1a]	Photographs from space show the
Earth’s surface as curved. Therefore the
curvature does not show when a
photograph is taken from ground level.
[1b]	The curvature does not show when a
photograph is taken from ground level,
so photographs from space show the
Earth’s surface as curved.
Neither of these makes sense. So [1] is not an
argument.
The same test can be applied to the next
example, only as there are more claims there
will be more rearrangements to try out.
[2]	Completed tax forms and payments
must be received by 31 July. Late
payment may result in a fine not
exceeding $100. Your payment did not
reach the tax office until 12 August.

2.4 Identifying arguments

33

There are three possible candidates for the
conclusion of [2], if there is one. So, applying
the test, we have these possibilities:
[2a]	Completed tax forms and payments must
be received by 31 July. Late payment
may result in a fine not exceeding $100.
Therefore your payment did not reach the
tax office until 12 August.
[2b]	Late payment may result in a fine not
exceeding $100. Your payment did not
reach the tax office until 12 August. So
completed tax forms and payments
must be received by 31 July.
[2c]	Completed tax forms and payments
must be received by 31 July. Your
payment did not reach the tax office
until 12 August. Therefore late payment
may result in a fine not exceeding $100.
In each rearrangement the attempt to use an
argument indicator sounds unnatural, which
indicates that none of the sentences is the kind
of claim that could follow from the others in
the way that a conclusion follows from
reasons.

Activity
Using the ‘therefore/so’ test, and the
definition of an argument as reasons and a
conclusion, decide which of the following
could be interpreted as arguments.
For those that are arguments, identify the
conclusion and note what kind of claim it is.
Lastly, discuss how well supported the
conclusion is, given the reasons.
[3] The Tokyo train leaves at 4.24. It
can take up to 40 minutes to get to
the station if the traffic is bad. We
should leave for the station by 3.40.
[4] Raisa is the only person with a key
to the safe. The police are bound to
treat her as a suspect. The money

34

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

went missing when she was in the
building on her own.
[5] You are likely to get a fine.
Completed tax forms and
payments must be received by 31
July and people who miss the
deadline are usually fined $100.
Your payment did not reach the
tax office until 12 August.
[6] From the 15th century European
sailors reached the lands of the east
by sailing west. Those who sailed
on and survived eventually arrived
back in Europe. When they
claimed they had sailed around the
world, few people believed them.
[7] There are only three possible causes
of the leak in your system: the pump
could be worn, a hose could be split
or one of the connections could be
loose. I’ve checked the hoses and
tightened all the connections, but
the machine still leaks.

Commentary
[3] is an argument. The conclusion, which is
at the end, is a recommendation. This also is a
useful clue: recommendations are often
accompanied by reasons. Here there are two:
the time of the train’s departure and the
possibility of a 40-minute journey to the
station. If they are both true, then clearly they
justify the conclusion.
[4] is also an argument. The conclusion is a
prediction that the police will (definitely)
suspect Raisa, firstly because she is the only
key-holder, and secondly because she was
alone in the building. The argument is
perhaps not quite as solid as [3]. Do police
always treat people as suspects in these
circumstances? The words ‘bound to . . .’ make
the conclusion a very strong claim. Even if
both premises are true, there may be other

factors – CCTV footage for instance – that
show Raisa was nowhere near the safe, and
therefore make it less than definite that she
will be treated as a suspect.
[5], too, is an argument. The conclusion is
another prediction (of sorts). You could also
have described it as a statement of probability:
‘You are likely to get a fine.’ The reasoning for
the conclusion is that payment did not reach
the tax office until 12 August, together with
the second sentence which establishes that the
payment was late and that late payment
usually results in a fine. The argument is quite
sound, mainly because the conclusion is a
fairly weak claim. If fines are usual for lateness,
then a fine is likely. If the claim had been that
the person would get a fine, the reasons would
not be adequate.
[6] is not an argument. None of the three
sentences makes sense with ‘therefore’ in front
of it, e.g. ‘From the 15th century European
sailors reached the lands of the east by sailing
west. Those who sailed on and survived
eventually arrived back in Europe. Therefore
when they claimed they had sailed around the
world, few people believed them.’ The
connective that makes most sense is ‘but’, not
‘therefore’. None of the claims is a conclusion
drawn from either or both of the other two;
and it is the same whichever order the claims
are placed in.
[7] is not an argument either – at least not
an explicit one – because, like [6], none of its
actual sentences is a natural conclusion.
However, [7] does point towards a conclusion,
even though it is not stated. In fact there is
really only one conclusion that you could
draw from [7] – that the pump must be
worn – because both the other possibilities are
ruled out. What we can say about [7] is that it
is not complete. It is left to you (the reader or
listener) to draw a conclusion – though in this
case it leaves you in little doubt as to what the
conclusion should be. We could say therefore
that [7] is an implicit argument, or that it has
an implicit conclusion.

Who wants an argument?
In the last unit we discussed arguments in
dialogue form, as well as single arguments.
Read the following passage – preferably aloud
with a partner, taking a part each – and then
answer the question that follows.
SCENE: a table for two in a restaurant
Anita:	What are you going to have?
		(Sound of a mobile phone)
Bara:	Just a minute. I’ve got a message.
Anita:	Not another!
Bara:	I need to answer it.
Anita:	Why don’t you just switch it off?
Restaurants are places for
conversation. They’re so antisocial,
those things.
Bara (texting at the same time):
		You wouldn’t say that if you had one.
You’d be on it all the time.
Anita:	I wouldn’t have one as a gift.
Bara:	Yes, you would. I’ll give you my old
one.
Anita:	Keep it. I’m better off without it. In
fact the whole world would be better
off if the wretched things had never
been invented.
Bara:	How do you work that out?
Anita:	Well for a start, you can’t sit
anywhere quietly any more without
having to listen to one end of
someone else’s shouted
conversation. Secondly, they’re a
health risk because they pour out
microwaves that cook your brain.
Thirdly, they distract drivers and
cause road accidents. So, like I said:
they do more harm than good.
Bara:	You just can’t say that. No one
thinks they are a health risk any
more. They don’t distract drivers
unless the drivers are stupid enough
to have them switched on in the car.
Not everybody shouts into their
phones, and not everyone finds
them irritating. They help people to

2.4 Identifying arguments

35

keep in touch. They save lives in
emergencies. They access
information when you need it. What
more do you want?
Anita (shouting):
		I’m sorry, but people do shout into
them. They don’t even know they’re
doing it. And they do use them when
they’re driving, whatever the law
does to stop them. If someone
smashed into you because she was
reading a text message, you would
soon change your tune.
Bara:	Hang on, you’re blaming an
inanimate object for what people do
with it. Of course there are always
some idiots who misuse stuff. It’s
like guns, isn’t it? Guns don’t kill, it’s
the people who fire the guns. You’re
making the same mistake.
Anita:	I’m not making a mistake. The
machines are to blame. I agree, a
gun can’t kill you until someone fires
it, but you can’t get shot either if
there are no guns to do it with. And
people couldn’t be distracted by
their phones when they’re driving if
there were no mobile phones. And
you wouldn’t still be sending that
text and spoiling our lunch.
Bara:	That’s just silly. You’ve lost that one.
Anita:	No I haven’t.
Bara:	You have. You’re just old-fashioned,
so you can’t see the value of the
new technology.
Anita:	I’m not old-fash–
Bara:	Be quiet, and let me finish this
message. I’ll be quicker if you just
stop talking.

Activity
Is the conversation above just a quarrel, or is
there reasoned argument going on here as
well? If there is, identify some examples.

36

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

Commentary
Overall, this conversation is a quarrel, and
parts of it are no more than exchanges of
opinion, laced with mild insults. But in the
course of the exchange there are examples of
developed argument as well, coming from
both sides.
The clearest example is Anita’s first long
paragraph. This is practically a standard
argument, with three numbered reasons and a
conclusion signalled by ‘so’. Bara responds
with a counter-argument. This gives three
reasons which challenge or contradict Anita’s
claims, then two further reasons (the value of
keeping people in touch, and of saving lives
in emergencies) to support a position which is
the complete opposite of Anita’s. Bara’s
conclusion is expressed by the first sentence
of the paragraph: ‘You just can’t say that.’ In
other words: ‘It is not true that mobile phones
do more harm than good,’ (as Anita has just
asserted). In natural-language arguments,
conclusions may not always be spelled out in
full, as they are in a standard argument.
Expressions such as ‘Yes’, ‘No’, ‘You’re wrong!’
can be understood as conclusions if it is clear
what they refer to and they are supported
by reasons.
In the three paragraphs that follow we see
Anita and Bara each trying to reinforce their
arguments with further reasons and
objections. Then, as their tempers begin to
fray, they go back to mere quarrelling and
personal remarks.

Summary
• We have considered ways of identifying
arguments using argument indicators.
• The difference between a reasoned
argument and a mere quarrel has been
established.
• We have seen examples of arguments in
the context of a dialogue.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Out of the following passages, only one is
an argument. Which is it, and how can it be
recognised as an argument? Why are the
others not arguments?
A Since the last earthquake in
California, engineers have been
investigating what happens to
man-made structures during a large
seismic event. They were surprised
that a section of the Bay Bridge,
which connects Oakland to San
Francisco, fell like a trapdoor. They
also discovered that in some of the
older double-decker freeways the
joints that connect the lower
column to the upper column may
be suspect.
B The public should not expect the
safety of drugs to be guaranteed by
animal testing. Aspirin, which is a
safe and effective painkiller for most
humans, is fatal to the domestic cat.
Penicillin poisons guinea pigs.
These examples show that different
species react to drugs differently.

C If more cash machines start making
a fixed charge for each withdrawal,
people who draw small amounts
will pay more in the long run than
those who make larger but fewer
withdrawals. People with low
incomes tend to make smaller
withdrawals, but are more willing
to look for machines that don’t
charge.
For questions 2 and 3 return to the dialogue
between Anita and Bara.
2 Look back at the dialogue on pages 35–6
and find the paragraph that begins: ‘I’m not
making a mistake . . .’ Is it an argument,
and if so, what is its conclusion?
3 Who do you think ‘wins’ the argument:
Anita or Bara? Give reasons for your
judgement.
	Note that this is an entirely open question:
it is for you to choose which criteria to use
in making your judgement, but you must
say what they are.
Answers and comments are on pages 311–12.

2.4 Identifying arguments

37

2.5 Analysing arguments
In Chapter 2.3 you were introduced to the idea
of a standard form of argument. In natural
language an argument can be expressed in
many different ways. Standard form shows
what the underlying argument is. If a text
cannot be reduced to a standard form of
argument, we have to question whether it
really is an argument.
In critical thinking we use the same basic
way of formalising arguments as logicians
have used for many centuries: we list the
reasons (or premises), and then the
conclusion. If we use R for ‘reason’ and C for
‘conclusion’ we can say that all arguments
have the form:
R1, R2, . . . Rn / C
The reasons and conclusion in a standard
argument are all claims. In theory there is no
limit to the number of reasons that can be
given for a conclusion. In practice the number
is usually between one and half-a-dozen.
The relation between the reasons and
conclusion of standard argument is roughly
equivalent to the phrase ‘so’, or ‘. . . and so . . .’,
which is why inserting ‘so’ or ‘therefore’ into
the text is a clue – though not an infallible
one. What the whole argument states is that
R1, R2, etc. are true; and that C follows from
them. Or that because R1, R2, etc. are true, C
must be true as well.
Another way to say this is that C is true as
a consequence of R1, R2, etc. being true.
Still another way is to say that C can be
inferred from R1, R2, etc. (Note that it is not
correct to say ‘R1, R2, etc. infer C.’ Inferences
are always from one or more claims to
another.)

38

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

Getting it right
Before you can respond critically to an
argument, by evaluating it or by challenging it
with a counter-argument, you need to have a
clear and accurate interpretation, or analysis, of
what the reasoning is. It is no good challenging
an argument if you have misunderstood or
misrepresented it. That is known as attacking a
‘straw man’ (from the stuffed sacks that soldiers
and archers once used for target practice).
What analysis entails is identifying the
parts of the argument and recognising how
they relate to each other, especially how the
reasons relate to the conclusion. One
convenient way to do this is to reconstruct
the argument in a standard form.
The simplest kinds of argument have one or
two reasons followed by the conclusion, and no
other content besides these. In practice such
arguments don’t really need analysing, as their
structure is plain enough already. However, we
will start with simple examples and build up to
more complex, less obvious ones later.

Activity
Here is an example of everyday reasoning,
which someone might use to persuade
another to hurry.
[1] The train doesn’t leave until 4.24,
but it can take up to 40 minutes to
get to the station, if the traffic’s bad.
It’s 3.30 now. We need to leave for
the station within ten minutes to be
sure of catching the train.
How would this argument look in standard
form?

Commentary
The prime purpose of analysis is to identify
each of the claims that comprise the argument
and to separate the reasons from the
conclusion. Since there are three main
reasons, we can label them R1 to R3, and the
conclusion we can label C:
R1	The train leaves at 4.24.
R2	It can take 40 minutes to get to the
station.
R3	It’s 3.30 now.
C	We need to set off within ten minutes to
be sure of catching the train.
(You can use ‘P’ for premise to replace ‘R’
if you prefer.)
Notice that in [1] there is no argument
indicator, such as ‘therefore’, ‘so’ or ‘because’.
That is because none is needed. It is obvious
which of the claims is the conclusion: it is
because of R1, R2 and R3 that the speaker
claims C, not the other way round.
Also notice that there are more claims in [1]
than there are sentences. The first two reasons
are connected by ‘but’ to form a single
compound sentence. Part of the job of analysis
is to identify each of the individual claims. So,
in standard form, these need to be listed
separately. Logically ‘but’ means the same as
‘and’ in that both R1 and R2 have to be true
for the whole compound sentence to be true.
‘But’ has a different meaning from ‘and’ in the
natural-language version. But as far as the
reasoning is concerned all that matters is that
the train leaves at 4.24 and that the journey
can take 40 minutes. Nor does it really matter
to the argument why the journey to the station
sometimes takes 40 minutes: it is sufficient
that it sometimes does. So, when you are
analysing an argument, it may not be
necessary to include every detail.
On the other hand, not all detail is
extraneous: some is essential. For example, the
conclusion of [1] is incomplete without the
phrase: ‘. . . to be sure of catching the train’.

If the next train would do just as well, then
there is no need to set off within ten minutes.
Where possible, analysis abbreviates a text, but
nothing essential can be left out. Sometimes
for clarification purposes an analysis may even
need to add explanatory detail.

How reasons relate to a conclusion
There is more to analysis, even of simple
arguments like [1], than simply listing
premises. We also need to know how the
premises operate in supporting the
conclusion.
In some arguments the reasons function
independently of one another, each giving
support to the conclusion in its own right. If
one premise is taken out, or found to be false,
it doesn’t fatally affect the argument because
the other, or others, may still be sufficient. The
argument may be a little weaker for the loss of
a premise; but like a plane with two or more
engines, the failure of one does not necessarily
knock it out of the sky.
There are other structures, however, in
which the reasons work together in support of
the conclusion. They are interdependent. This is
more than just an interesting detail. It is an
important factor when we come to evaluation.
In an argument with interdependent premises,
both or all of them are necessary for the
conclusion to follow. If one is omitted, or found
to be false, the conclusion cannot be inferred
from the other (or others) on their own.
In [1] the reasons are interdependent. It is
the train time together with the time it can take
to get to the station and the time it is now
that justifies the conclusion. If any of these
three reasons turned out to be unwarranted,
then the argument would fail. For example, if
the train were not due until 5.24, then the
other two, on their own, would not establish
the need for setting off at 3.40. Or if R2 was
an exaggeration, and it never took 40 minutes
to get to the station, leaving in ten minutes
would not be necessary. The remaining
premises would be true, but the conclusion

2.5 Analysing arguments

39

would not follow from them. (If you want to
check this, try crossing out each of the
premises in turn and see the effect it has on
the argument.)

Structure
The structure of argument [1] can be
represented diagrammatically, for example
like this:
R1 & R2 & R3

C

The single arrow shows that it is the
combination of all three premises that leads to
the conclusion.
In comparison, look at the next argument.
[2]	Short-range flights may have become
cheap, but rail travel makes a lot more
sense. Flying is responsible for ten
times the carbon emissions of rail travel
per passenger/km, and twice as much
stress. What is more, trains take you to
the heart of a city, not to some far-flung
airport.

Get there
for a bus fare
with Noisyjet

Commentary
The conclusion is the first sentence. It is
followed by three supporting claims. So in
standard form the reasoning is as follows:
R1	Flying is responsible for ten times the
carbon emissions of rail travel.
R2	Flying is twice as stressful (as rail
travel).
R3	Trains take you to the heart of a city, not
to some far-flung airport.
	
C	Rail travel makes a lot more sense than
short-range flights.
So far [1] and [2] look to have quite similar
shapes: three premises, one conclusion. But
there the similarity ends. In the case of [2]
there is no interdependence between the
premises. Each offers a separate line of
reasoning to the conclusion. In the case of R3,
for instance, the inference that rail travel
makes more sense is made on the grounds that
trains take passengers right into a city centre,
unlike planes. (Actually, this is not always the
case, but it is what the author claims.) True or
not, R3 does not rely on the truth of either of
the other two premises, nor they on it. So,
even if you decide that R3 is not a justified
reason, you can still argue that rail travel
makes more sense on the basis of lower
emissions (R1) and less stress (R2).
So, if you wanted to represent the structure
of [2] in a diagram, you would need three
separate arrows for the three independent
reasons. For example:
R1

R2

R3

C

Activity
Rewrite [2] in standard form, and comment
on the structure of the reasoning.

40

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

Indeed, there are grounds for analysing [2] as
three arguments, rather than just one. All
three share the same conclusion, but each one
is a separate line of reasoning.

Note that the first part-sentence, ‘Shortrange flights may have become cheap’, is not a
reason. In fact it is not part of the argument at
all. The fact that flying may be cheaper would,
if anything, be a reason for choosing to fly, so
obviously it does not support the conclusion.
What it does is show why an argument is
needed. The author is saying: ‘OK, there may
be a financial reason for going by air, but look
at these other reasons for travelling by train.’
In other words, this opening clause puts the
whole argument into the context of a
potential debate: ‘Which is better: plane or
train?’

Mixed arguments
In arguments with more than two premises
there may be some that function
independently, and others that combine forces.

R3	The news is all round the college.
R4	Rajinder spread a story that I told him
in confidence.
C	Rajinder cannot be trusted to keep
a secret.
The first three reasons depend on each other.
Obviously, if I had told several people, or if
others had known besides Rajinder, it might
not have been Rajinder who was to blame; and
if the news hadn’t spread there would be no
reason to suggest Rajinder had told anyone the
secret. R4, on the other hand, does not have to
be true for the conclusion to follow from the
other three. Therefore, although R4 adds
strength to the argument, it is separate from
the other reasons: an additional reason for
inferring that Rajinder cannot be trusted.
As a diagram:

Activity
Try rewriting the following argument in
standard form, and explaining its structure in
words or by means of a diagram:
[3] Rajinder cannot be trusted to keep a
secret. He was the only person apart
from me who knew about Jed and
Jill getting engaged. I haven’t said a
word to anyone, yet now the news is
all round the college. And he spread
another story about Jill that I told
him in confidence.

R1 & R2 & R3

R4

C

Don’t worry if you have structured the
sentences a little differently. For example,
some people might prefer to treat R4 as two
reasons: Rajinder spread the story; and R5, I
told it to him in confidence. These two reasons
would of course be dependent on each other,
so the alternative analysis would be:

Commentary
Once again the first sentence is the
conclusion, but this time it is supported by
four or five reasons (depending on how you
choose to analyse them).
R1	Rajinder was the only person apart from
me who knew about Jed and Jill getting
engaged.
R2	I haven’t told anyone.

R1 & R2 & R3

R4 & R5

C

You will find, as you work on more complex
arguments, that there can be some differences
in the way an argument is analysed. That is

2.5 Analysing arguments

41

because analysis is a form of interpretation,
and different interpretations can be found for
the same text. The more complex the text,
the more room there is for differing
interpretations.
So, if your way of reconstructing an
argument is not exactly the same as the one
suggested in the book, this won’t necessarily
mean that yours is wrong. What is important
is that you recognise the conclusion and the
main reasons, and that you are satisfied that
you understand the argument and can explain
it clearly. Analysis helps you to be clear, but it
should not be a straitjacket.

Summary
• We have looked at the workings of some
relatively simple arguments, and suggested
some ways of analysing and interpreting
them, by identifying the reason(s) and the
conclusion, and explaining the structure.
• Reasons (premises) can operate
in combination with each other, or
independently.
• Some parts of a text may not belong to the
actual argument.

End-of-chapter assignment
Analyse the following arguments using the
methods discussed in this unit.
a People shouldn’t be fooled into buying
bottled mineral water. It’s meant to be
safe but there have been several health
alerts about chemicals found in some
brands. It costs silly money, and anyway
tap water, which is free, is just as good.
b It is inevitable that every year some
athletes will give in to the temptation of
taking performance-enhancing drugs. At
the highest levels of sport, drugs can
make the difference between winning gold
and winning nothing. The rewards are so

42

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

huge for those who reach the top that the
risk will always seem worth taking.
c No sport should be allowed in which the
prime object is to injure an opponent.
Nor should any sport be allowed in which
the spectators enjoy seeing competitors
inflict physical harm on each other. On
that score, boxing should be one of the
first sports to be outlawed. What boxers
have to do, in order to win matches, is to
batter their opponents senseless in front
of large, bloodthirsty crowds.
Answers and comments are on page 312.

2.6 Complex arguments
In the last chapter we saw how reasons –
independently or in combination – support a
conclusion. In every case there was just one
conclusion.
But in some arguments there may be more
than one conclusion. One or more of the
reasons may lead to an intermediate
conclusion, which then leads on to a main or
final conclusion. Intermediate conclusions
together with their supporting reasons form
sub-arguments. There may be two or more
sub-arguments within the larger argument.

Here is an example:
[1]	In some parts of the world, cars are still
driven on the left side of the road. This
can result in accidents involving drivers
from other countries who are used to
traffic being on the right. Pedestrians
are also at risk from looking the wrong
way before crossing the roads. Cities
would be safer, therefore, if in all
countries the rule were the same. Since
countries where the drivers keep to the
left are in a minority, those countries
should change over to the right.

2.6 Complex arguments

43

Activity
Identify the two argument indicators in [1],
and use them to give an analysis of the
argument.

Commentary
With the help of the two connectives,
‘therefore’ and ‘since’, you will have had no
difficulty identifying two conclusions:
C1 Cities would be safer if in all countries
the rule were the same.
C2 Countries where drivers keep to the left
should change over to the right.
The first of these, C1, is drawn from two
reasons (or premises):
R1 Driving on the left can cause accidents
involving drivers from other countries.
R2 Pedestrians are also at risk from looking
the wrong way.
The second conclusion then follows from the
first, making a two-stage argument from R1
and R2 to C1; and from C1 to C2.
To put it another way, we have a subargument – (R1 & R2) → C1 – and a main
argument, C1 → C2. This means that C1
functions as both a conclusion (of one
argument) and a premise (of the other). Hence
we call C1 the intermediate conclusion (IC),
and C2 the main conclusion (MC – or just C).
However, you may have noticed that within
the final sentence there is another reason that
directly supports the main conclusion, namely
that countries where drivers keep to the left
are in the minority. As this is a premise we can
call it R3.
What would you say if you were asked
whether R1 and R2 count as reasons for the
main conclusion? Strictly speaking they are
not: they are reasons for the intermediate
conclusion, and support the main conclusion
only indirectly. C1 is a direct reason for the
main conclusion. So is R3. This distinction
between direct and indirect reasons – like the

44

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

distinction between sub-arguments and main
arguments – is very important, as you will see
when we come to evaluating this argument
and asking whether the reasoning does
adequately support its conclusions.

Background information; context
You may also have wondered what to do with
the first sentence: ‘In some parts of the world,
cars are still driven on the left . . .’ You possibly
listed it as a reason. This is not exactly wrong;
in one sense it is because there are some
drive-on-the-left countries that there are
accidents. But there is another way to look at
this which also makes good sense. The first
sentence can be understood as the background
information, or context, for the argument. It is
because of the diversity of traffic rules that
there is an argument to be had.
Neither interpretation would make your
analysis wrong; nor would it make any
difference to an assessment of the success or
failure of the argument. In the interpretation
that follows we have chosen to call the first
sentence ‘context’; but if you prefer to call it a
reason, you can amend the analysis yourself.
As stated in the previous chapter, there is often
room for different interpretations. As long as
you can justify your analysis, and it makes
good sense of the text, you are entitled to give
a different slant.

A full analysis
Context: In some parts of the world, cars are still
driven on the left.
R1	Driving on the left can cause
accidents involving drivers from
other countries.
R2	Pedestrians are also at risk from
looking the wrong way.
	
C1 (IC)	Cities would be safer if in all
countries the rule were the same.
R3	Countries where drivers keep to the
left are in a minority.
	

C2 (MC)	Drive-on-the-left countries should
change to the right.
Put into words, the fact that in some countries
cars are driven on the left, and the claim that
this can cause accidents, each leads
(separately) to the conclusion that cities
would be safer if all countries did the same.
This, together with the fact that there are
many more drive-on-the-right countries than
left, then leads to a final, or main, conclusion
that the drive-on-the-left countries should
change to the right.
Complex arguments like this, where one
argument links into another, are often called
‘chains of reasoning’. The diagram shows
clearly why this metaphor is used.
R1

R2

IC

R3

C

Study this argument carefully and make sure
you follow the steps, or links, in it. It is
important to understand how the conclusion
of one argument can also be a reason given in
support of a further argument. It is also very
important to be able to distinguish between
the main conclusion in an argument and any
intermediate conclusions reached on the way,
especially since this pattern of reasoning is
very widely used.

Activity
Here is another argument that consists of a
chain of reasoning. Analyse it using some of
the techniques discussed in the last
example. Then look at the suggested
analysis that follows.
[2] We should not rush headlong into
large-scale recycling projects without

carefully weighing the gains and the
losses. Recycling used materials may
in the long run prove uneconomical.
The cost of collecting up and sorting
rubbish, plus the cost of the
recycling process itself, often makes
the end product more expensive
than manufacturing the same
product from raw materials. This
extra cost has to be paid by someone:
if it is not the consumer, then it is the
taxpayer in the form of subsidies.
Nor is recycling always the best
solution environmentally. The high
levels of energy required for
processing waste can cause pollution.
This can also add to global warming.

Commentary
This is a more complicated argument to unravel
than the last one because the reasons and
conclusions are in a different order, and there are
no argument indicators to mark the conclusions.
The main conclusion is the first sentence:
‘We should not rush headlong . . .’ There are
two direct reasons for reaching this
conclusion. The first is that recycling may be
uneconomical. The second is that it may harm
the environment. Each of these has its own
supporting premises, making each one an
intermediate conclusion leading to the main
conclusion.
The best way to list and label the reasons is
for you to decide. But your analysis must
identify the main conclusion, and recognise
that there are two distinct sub-arguments
leading to the main conclusion. For example:
R1	The cost of recycling often makes the
end product more expensive than
manufacturing the same product from
raw materials.
R2	This extra cost has to be paid by
someone: if it is not the consumer, then

2.6 Complex arguments

45

it is the taxpayer in the form of
subsidies.
	
IC1 (from R1 & R2)
	Recycling used materials may in the long
run prove uneconomical.
R3	The high levels of energy required for
processing waste can cause pollution.
R4	This can also add to global warming.
	
IC2 (from R3 & R4)
	Recycling is not always the best solution
environmentally.
C (from IC1 & IC2)
	We should not rush headlong into
large-scale recycling projects.

R1 & R2

R3 & R4

IC1

IC2

C

In this example the diagram really helps to
show the complex argument structure. There
are two separate lines of reasoning and
therefore two arrows leading to the conclusion.
If you took away one of the lines, say R3 & R4 →
IC2, you would still have an argument for C. It
would not be as strong, because it would
present only the economic reasons for not
rushing into recycling, not the economic and
environmental reasons. Similarly, if you took
away or refuted the sub-argument leading to
IC1, you would still have an environmental
argument to fall back on.

A useful strategy
You saw in both [1] and [2] that there were
direct and indirect reasons. A good strategy for
analysing difficult arguments is this: first select
what you think is the main conclusion, then

46

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

look for the direct reasons that support it. Then
look for reasons (if any) that support the direct
reasons. In other words, work backwards from
what you think is the main conclusion. Find:
(first) conclusion ← (then) direct reasons ←
(then) reasons for the reasons.
Put them together to see if they make sense as
an argument. If not, try again.

Reported or ‘embedded’ arguments
Very often, in the media, or in magazines and
journals, arguments are reported, rather than
being expressed directly. Another way of
saying this is that an argument may be
embedded in a report or article or piece of
research, and so on. Argument [2] is a direct
argument. But originally it appeared in the
following way:
[2a]	An environmental consortium has
advised against rushing headlong into
large-scale recycling projects without
carefully weighing the gains and the
losses, pointing out that recycling used
materials may in the long run prove
uneconomical. ‘The cost of collecting
up and sorting rubbish,’ said their
representative, ‘plus the cost of the
recycling process itself, often makes
the end product more expensive than
manufacturing the same product from
raw materials.’ This extra cost, she
went on, has to be paid by someone:
. . . [etc.]
Strictly speaking this is not an argument: it is a
report of an argument, made by someone
other than the author of the report. The
author of the report is not arguing for or
against large-scale recycling projects; and we
have no idea from the report alone whether he
or she agreed or disagreed with its premises or
conclusion, at the time of writing.
Nonetheless, there is an argument
embedded in [2a], and it can be analysed and

evaluated like any other argument, once it has
been extracted from the report. Instead of
being asked to respond to the author’s
argument, you would be asked to respond to
the consortium’s argument, as it is represented
in the report. To extract the argument, all you
have to do is transpose the reported speech
back into direct speech, at which point it will
have the same standard form as [2].

More about context: targets and
opposing views
As already noted in argument [1], interpreting
an argument can leave you with parts of the
text which don’t seem to be reasons or
conclusions. In fact they don’t seem to belong
to the argument at all. In some cases there are
parts that even appear to oppose it.
Here is an example:
[3]	Top women tennis players used to
grumble that their prize money was less
substantial than that paid to top male
players in the same competition. They
argued that they were being unequally
treated. But the disparity was entirely
justified and should never have been
abolished. Male players just have more
prowess than women. They need to win
three sets out of five to take the match;
the women only two. They have to play
harder and faster, and expend far more
energy on court than the women. But
most of all, if the best woman in the
tournament played any of the men, there
would be no contest: the man would win.

Activity
What do you make of the first two sentences
of [3]? Discuss where you think they fit in.

Commentary
The short answer is that the first two sentences
don’t fit in – not to the actual argument. They

are a necessary part of the text, of course,
because without them the argument would
not make much sense. (Try reading the
passage without them and you will see this for
yourself.) But they are neither reasons nor
conclusions of the author’s argument. In fact
they really belong to an opposing argument,
because they are about the women’s case for
equal prizes, not the author’s case for keeping
the men’s prize money higher.
We can think of these opening sentences –
everything preceding the word ‘But . . . ’, as
the target for the author’s argument. The
whole point and purpose of that argument is
to respond to the women’s alleged claim of
unfairness and inequality. Another way to put
this is that the first two sentences place the
argument into a context. Or you could say
that they introduce it, or provide background
information. Any of these labels would do.
Some textbooks refer to parts of a text
which function as the target for an argument
as a counter-argument, but this is misleading. If
anything is to be called a counter-argument
here it is the author’s argument, because the
author is the one responding, not the women.
What the first two sentences are doing is
explaining the context; setting the scene.
So, in standard form we have:
 ontext (or target): Top women tennis players
C
used to complain about the inequalities of
prize money.
But . . .
R1	Men have to win three out of five sets;
the women only two.
R2	The men play harder and faster and use
more energy.
R3	Any of the men would beat the best
woman.
	
IC	The men have more prowess.
	
C	The disparity was justified and should
not have been abolished.

2.6 Complex arguments

47

The value of analysis
Thoroughly analysing an argument is the
surest way to get a clear understanding of its
meaning and structure. It also gives you the
best chance of responding to it appropriately.
When you see its parts laid out for inspection,
and the links between them, you can quickly
spot strengths, weaknesses, gaps, and so on
which may not be at all obvious when the
argument is wrapped up in ordinary, everyday
language.
The kind of detailed analysis you have
practised in the last few pages will not always
be necessary. Once you become more skilled at
it, you will be able to recognise the main
conclusion of an argument and see the lines of
reasoning more instinctively, without having to
list and label all the parts. Listing and labelling
is the way to acquire and embed the skills.

48

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

Summary
• Some arguments have intermediate
conclusions that lead on to a main
conclusion.
• An intermediate conclusion has its
own supporting reason(s). It is both a
conclusion and a reason for a further
conclusion.
• Some sections of a text may not be
reasons or conclusions: they may just
introduce or provide a context – sometimes
in the form of a ‘target’ – for the argument
itself.
• Often an argument will be embedded in a
report, and needs to be extracted from the
text by converting it into direct speech.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 D
 raw a diagram which shows the structure
of argument [3]. (You may follow the model
used in the commentaries, or invent your
own method of representation.)
2 L ook again at argument [1] and the
accompanying visual material. How might
this material be understood as part of the
argument? What part would it play?
3 A
 nalyse the following arguments to
show their reasons and conclusions,
including any intermediate conclusions.
Also, separate and label any background
information or opposing views which are
there as a target for the argument.
a R
 ecently the operators of a cruise liner
were fined $18m for dumping oil and
other hazardous waste at sea. This may
seem substantial, but in the same year
the ship earned profits of $340m. The
company could well afford the fine, and
dumping saved them the considerable
expense of storing and legally disposing
of the waste. So emptying their tanks
into the ocean was probably a risk worth
taking. Nor was it much of a risk. In the
last decade only a handful of companies
have been fined and every year there
are unsuccessful attempts to prosecute.
We must give the authorities greater
powers and demand that they use them.
Otherwise the oceans of the world are in
danger of becoming open sewers.
b T he South Pole must once have been
much warmer than it is today. Scientists
have recently discovered some threemillion-year-old leaves preserved there

in the ice. Despite their age, they are
so undamaged, and preserved in such
fine detail, that they could not have
been carried there by wind or sea.
Therefore, they can only be from trees
that once grew there. The leaves belong
to a species of beech tree that grows
only in warm or temperate regions; and
beeches do not evolve quickly enough
to adapt to changes in climate.

OCR (adapted)
4 Extract the argument from the following
report, and identify its conclusion and
supporting reasons.
	A top tennis coach, Annabel Aftar, has
reacted angrily to calls for a ban on
grunting. Players who emit a loud
explosive sound each time they hit
the ball have been accused by some of
putting opponents off their game.
Ms Aftar opposed a ban by saying that
grunting is a natural and unstoppable
accompaniment to sudden effort, and
that making women play in nearsilence would reduce the power of
their shots, placing an unfair
handicap on some but not on others.
Some women can control grunting,
others can’t, she said, adding that it is
not just a female thing. Some men
grunt almost as much as the women.
Answers and comments are on pages 312–13.

2.6 Complex arguments

49

2.7 Conclusions
The most important function of argument
analysis is identifying the conclusion. Once it
is clear what the author is seeking to establish
or justify, the rest of the argument usually falls
into place.
The kind of detailed analysis you have been
studying in the last two chapters is not always
necessary. If an argument is quite short and
straightforward, the conclusion often stares
you in the face. But with longer and more
complex arguments, it can be very easy – as
the saying goes – ‘to get the wrong end of the
stick’: to mistake a reason for a conclusion, or
an intermediate conclusion for the main
conclusion; or to misunderstand the direction
of the argument altogether. It is in order to
avoid this kind of misinterpretation that you
need skill and confidence in argument
analysis generally, and the recognition of
conclusions in particular.
As already noted in previous chapters, the
conclusion of an argument is often marked by
the word ‘so’ or its equivalent. Alternatively
the conclusion may be followed by ‘because’
(or some equivalent), to indicate that a reason
or reasons are being given to support the
preceding claim. In the absence of such
linguistic clues – and they often are absent –
we have to look to the claims themselves to
decide if there is an argument present, and if
so which part or parts of it express the
conclusion.
Here is a very simple example:
[1]	The government won’t raise taxes this
close to the election. Tax rises are not
vote-winners.
In [1] there are two claims: the first is a
prediction, the second a claim to fact. It is quite

50

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

obvious here that the factual claim is being
given as a reason for the prediction; not the
reverse. It is because raising taxes is not a
vote-winner that the author is predicting that
the government will not do it. If instead we try
to say that tax rises are not vote-winners
because the government will not raise them, we
end up with something that barely makes sense.
However, this does not mean that the
second sentence couldn’t be a conclusion, in
a different argument. Suppose I were to
reason as follows:
[2]	People say they want good public
services, but they don’t like it when any
more of their hard-earned money is
taken to pay for them. Tax rises are
simply not vote-winners.
Here it is perfectly reasonable to interpret the
first sentence as a reason to assert, and believe,
the second. In standard and abbreviated form:
 eople don’t like paying more (for public
P
services).
Tax rises are not vote-winners.

Activity
In [1] and [2] there was a single premise and
a single conclusion. In the next passage
there is more work to do.
[3] Most spoken languages come in
many different accents and dialects.
They also contain colloquial, even
slang, expressions that vary from
region to region, or class to class.

The only way to learn a foreign
language properly is to go and live
in the country where it is spoken.
Classroom teaching, books or DVDs
cannot give students the necessary
exposure to the variations and
subtleties of everyday speech.
Which sentence is the conclusion of
argument [3] – and why?

Commentary
Your discussion should have led you to see that
the conclusion is the last-but-one sentence: the
claim that the only way to learn a language
properly is to go and live in the country where
it is spoken. The author is claiming this on the
grounds that spoken languages have many
‘variations and subtleties’ – such as dialects and
colloquialisms – and that school language
lessons cannot give students the requisite
exposure to these features.
Remember that what we are primarily
concerned with here is identifying the
conclusion. We are not yet evaluating the
argument or responding to it. But although
analysis and evaluation are separate activities,
there is inevitably some overlap between them.
For a claim to be recognisable as a conclusion
we have to be able to say that there is some level
of support given by the claims we identify as
the reasons, even if it is not entirely convincing
support.
The difficulty comes when there is more
than one possible way to interpret a text as
an argument. How can we be confident that
in [3] the penultimate sentence really is the
conclusion for which the author is arguing,
rather than, say, the last sentence? Might the
author not be saying that because of all the
dialects and colloquialisms that are found in
spoken languages, school lessons cannot give
students the exposure they need to learn a
language properly?
Well, the author might be saying this.
Critical thinking is not mind-reading. But nor

is it guesswork. What we should be asking,
when we analyse a piece of text as an
argument, is not what the author might have
been thinking, but which interpretations
gives us the best or most persuasive
argument. Another way to ask this is: Which
interpretation makes the best sense as an
argument? It is for this purpose that the
‘therefore/so’ test becomes a useful tool.
Compare:
[3a]	The only way to learn a foreign language
properly is to go and live in the country
where it is spoken. Therefore classroom
teaching, books or DVDs cannot give
students the necessary exposure to the
variations and subtleties of everyday
speech (dialects, slang, etc.).
with:
[3b] Classroom teaching, books or DVDs
cannot give students the necessary
exposure to the variations and subtleties
of everyday speech (dialects, slang,
etc.). Therefore the only way to learn a
foreign language properly is to go and
live in the country where it is spoken.
The difference is quite clear. [3b] not only
makes better sense than [3a]; it is a better
argument than [3a]. In fact it makes better
sense because it is a better argument. The best
interpretation that we can place on [3] is that
the first, second and fourth sentences are
being presented as grounds for the third.
Abbreviated, and in standard form, we have:
R1	Spoken language has different accents
and dialects.
R2	There are also colloquialisms and slang.
R3	Classroom teaching, books and DVDs
cannot give requisite exposure (to these).
C	The only way to learn is to go and live in
the country.
You may have wanted to say that R3 was an
intermediate conclusion from R1 and R2.

2.7 Conclusions

51

However, R3 does not so much follow from
the previous two claims as join with them to
support C. The structure then would be:
R1 & R2 & R3

arguments, or steps. To distinguish main
conclusions from intermediate conclusions,
you still just ask yourself: Which follows from
which? or: Which makes better sense as a
reason for the other?

Activity
C

The principle of charity
The rule that says we should interpret a
supposed argument in a favourable way – that
is, as a good argument rather than a poor
one – is known as the principle of charity.
Note that despite the name, this doesn’t mean
being kind or generous to the author. All it
means is that we should assume that the
author is a rational individual who
understands the difference between good and
bad reasoning at least as well as we do
ourselves. So, if we have in front of us a text
that could be understood as ‘X therefore Y’, or
as ‘Y therefore X’, and we can see that X is a
good reason for believing Y, but Y is not a
good reason for believing X, then on the
principle of charity we should accept the first
interpretation and not the second.
This explains why there is often a slight
overlap between analysis and evaluation. We
are not just looking for lists of sentences that
can be called an argument (however bad), but
one which goes some way towards being a good
argument. By the same token, if a piece of text
makes much better sense as a non-argument
than as a argument, we should not just assume
it is bad argument.
We shall return to this important principle
when we discuss evaluation and counterarguments in Chapters 4.9 and 7.7.

Complex arguments and multiple
conclusions
The procedure is the same for longer and/or
more complex arguments, except that you
may have to repeat it for each of the sub-

52

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

Look at the next example and answer the
multiple-choice question that follows it.
[4] Parents naturally tend to think that,
because they are older and more
experienced, they know better than
their children. They consequently
assume that their judgements and
decisions are the right ones. But in
many ways children are much
cleverer than their parents give them
credit for. They frequently display
problem-solving skills that their
parents do not possess; and they are
more adventurous in their thinking,
if only because they are less afraid of
making mistakes. Parents should pay
closer attention to what their
children have to say, and allow them
to make more decisions for
themselves. Apart from anything
else, this would help to relieve many
unnecessary family tensions.
Which one of the following best expresses
the main conclusion of the argument? As well
as making your selection, give a brief reason
why you think it is right, and why you thought
the others were wrong.
A Children are much cleverer than their
parents give them credit for, and
frequently display problem-solving skills
that their parents do not possess.
B Parents naturally assume that their
judgements and decisions are the
right ones.
C Children don’t mind making mistakes to
the extent that their parents generally do.

D Parents should attend more to what
their children say, and allow them to make
more decisions.
E A reduction in family tensions would result
if parents listened more to what their
children think.

Commentary
There are multiple-choice questions like this
in some but not all critical thinking syllabuses
and examination papers, and in some
admissions tests to universities or professions.
It is good practice to try some from time to
time, and you can find plenty of sample
papers with sets of such questions on various
examination websites.
Unless you are told otherwise, only one of the
options is correct. That is the case here. The
other options either correspond to one of the
reasons, or to an intermediate conclusion, or to a
piece of background information; or they
misrepresent the conclusion altogether. Usually
in such tests, you are not required to give any
explanation or justification for your choice, but
because this is a learning activity, you were asked
to say why you made the choice you did, and
why you rejected the others. (You should always
do this when you are using multiple-choice
questions to improve your skills.)
So how did you go about the task? Did you
read the passage, then immediately look
through A–E to find the most promising
response? If so, you were asking for trouble.
This is not a good strategy. Although the
incorrect responses are not designed to trick
you, they are designed to make you think.
They are called distracters, and with good
reason, for it is very easy to be tempted by an
answer because it echoes something in the
passage, or simply because it ‘sounds right’.
A much safer approach is to ignore the
responses A–E completely while you analyse
the argument and identify its conclusion
yourself; then to look for the response that best

matches your analysis. That way you are not
so much looking for an answer as looking for
confirmation of your own answer. If you find
a response that matches yours, you will have
two good reasons for choosing it, not one.
So, what’s the argument here? The passage
starts by claiming that parents tend to think
they know best and consequently assume their
decisions and judgements are the right ones.
This has the look of an argument already, but it
is clearly not making the author’s own point.
For, like the tennis argument in Chapter 2.6,
the opening sentences are followed by the
word ‘But’, signalling an opposing view. What
parents think is therefore just the introduction
or target for the real argument.
The author’s own argument stems from the
claim that children are often wiser than
parents think, supported by observations
about their problem-solving skills, and so on.
Then comes the recommendation that
parents should pay children more attention
and allow them to make more decisions. This
also looks a likely conclusion, but does it
follow from the claim that children are wiser
than their parents think, or support it?
Clearly it does follow: the passage is not
saying (nor would it make much sense to say)
that parents should pay closer attention to
their children, and therefore children are
wiser than their parents think. So, a full and
fair analysis would be:
 ontext: Parents naturally tend to think
C
that . . . they know better than their
children, etc.
But . . .
R1	Children frequently display problem-solving
skills that their parents do not possess.
R2	They are more adventurous in their
thinking.
IC	In many ways children are much cleverer
than their parents give them credit for.
R3	Paying closer attention etc. would help to
relieve family tensions.

2.7 Conclusions

53

C Parents should pay closer attention to
what their children have to say, and allow
them to make more decisions for
themselves.
Now look at the responses A–E. Which of
them, if any, matches the meaning of the
main conclusion of the passage? Obviously it
is D: ‘Parents should attend more to what their
children say, and allow them to make more
decisions.’ We can safely select that as a close
paraphrase of the actual conclusion.
What about the other options, the
‘distracters’? Even though you may feel
confident in your choice, it is sound practice
to reassure yourself that none of the others is
as good or better – and why. It is easy to do
this once you have carefully analysed the
argument. Here are responses A–E again:
A Children are much cleverer than their
parents give them credit for, and frequently
display problem-solving skills that their
parents do not possess.
B Parents naturally assume that their
judgements and decisions are the right
ones.
C Children don’t mind making mistakes to
the extent that their parents generally do.
D Parents should attend more to what their
children say, and allow them to make
more decisions.
E A reduction in family tensions would result
if parents listened more to what their
children think.
A is not the main conclusion: it is a
combination of R1 and IC. B looks like a
conclusion partly because in the original
text this claim begins with the word
‘consequently’. However, on a proper reading
of the whole passage it becomes clear that it
is only a target for the main argument, once
again showing that indicator words do not
tell the whole story but must be understood
in the context of the text as a whole. C is an

54

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

explanatory detail, suggesting why children
may be more adventurous. It is not supported
by any other claims and is not therefore a
conclusion. E comes at the end of the
argument, which is a natural place for a
conclusion. However, it should have been
clear that it is there to give extra support to
the argument, and is not its conclusion.
Eliminating A, B, C and E in this way is a
worthwhile exercise to reassure yourself that
you have made the right choice. But beware
of using it as the only way of selecting the
correct response. You need to have positive
reasons for making your selection as well as
negative reasons for rejecting the others.

Diffuse conclusions
The conclusion in each of the foregoing
examples has been a self-contained sentence
in the text of the argument. We come now to
a rather different situation, and one which
requires even more perceptive, interpretative
skill.
Sometimes a conclusion is not expressed in
one go, but is broken up, or repeated, or
stated in more than one way, at different
points in the text. (A useful word for this is
‘diffuse’, or ‘diffused’. A diffuse conclusion is
one that is spread through the argument, rather
than being one component.) Identifying a
conclusion, in these circumstances, means
gathering or summarising it.
For example, look at the next argument:
[5] We are taught from an early age that we
should tell the truth, the whole truth and
nothing but the truth at all times and
without question. But it is simplistic to
pretend that truth-telling is always right
and falsifying always wrong. Some people
may tell the truth just to cause trouble;
others may decide not to tell the truth just
to save someone else from distress or to
protect them from danger. The morality or
immorality of a deed depends on its
consequences and the motives for doing

it. On its own the simple act of saying
what is so, or what is not so, can be
judged neither right nor wrong.

Activity
Which would you say was the main
conclusion here? Try to summarise it in your
own words.

Commentary
What makes this a tricky argument to analyse
cleanly is that the conclusion is spread out,
rather than stated in a single sentence or
phrase. It is clear enough that the first
sentence is the target, setting up the standard
principle that we should always tell the truth.
It is also clear that the rest of the passage is
contesting the principle, by giving two
counter-examples as reasons:
R1 Some people tell the truth to cause
trouble.
R2 Some people do not tell the truth to
save others from distress, etc.
Between them these reasons support three
closely related claims, out of which it would
be difficult to decide which was the
conclusion. Instead of forming a chain of
reasoning, they all seem to be making roughly
the same point, only in slightly different ways:
• It is simplistic to pretend that truth-telling
is always right and falsifying always wrong.
• The morality or immorality of a deed
depends on its consequences and the
motives for doing it.

• On its own the simple act of saying what
is so, or what is not so, can be judged
neither right nor wrong.
In such circumstances you can do one of two
things. You can either choose the sentence
which you think is the clearest expression of
the conclusion. Or you can summarise the
conclusion to which all three appear to be
contributing. For example:
 ithout considering motives and
W
consequences, lying and truth-telling cannot
be judged right or wrong.
You could be excused for thinking that [5] is a
badly written argument, because its conclusion
is not clearly stated once and for all. However,
writers – good ones and bad ones – do this all
the time, as a way of emphasising or reinforcing
or clarifying the point they are making. In
analysing such arguments you must be ready to
summarise the conclusion and premises in your
own words. The main purpose of analysing and
standardising arguments is to simplify their
meaning. When dealing with real texts by real
authors you cannot always expect the job to be
done for you!

Summary
• The primary purpose of argument analysis
is to identify or summarise the conclusion.
• When identifying a conclusion, we should
apply the principle of charity, by interpreting
the text in the way which makes the best
sense as an argument.

2.7 Conclusions

55

End-of-chapter assignments
Consider each of the following arguments,
then answer the multiple-choice question
which follows. There is only one correct
answer to each question.
As well as answering the question, justify
your selection by saying why you think it is
the right one, and why the others are wrong.
This will help you to improve your scores in
multiple-choice tests, and your analysis skills
generally.
1 When cities become congested with
traffic, the usual solution is to make
a charge for bringing a car into the
centre. This works, but it is wrong to
do it, because it discriminates in favour
of those who can easily afford to pay.
The less well-off in society are penalised
so that the rich can enjoy the luxury
of clear streets. Therefore congestion
charges everywhere should be abolished.
A system of rationing car use should be
introduced instead, allowing each driver
into the city just once or twice per week.
Then everyone benefits equally.
Which of the following expresses the main
conclusion of the argument?
A The usual solution to congestion is
charging to drive cars into the city
centre.
B It is wrong to charge drivers because it
discriminates in favour of the rich.
C Rationing car use should be brought in
to replace congestion charges.
D Everyone would benefit from an
abolition of congestion charges.

56

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

2 Train fares differ enormously, with the
most expensive always applying when
people have to commute to and from
work, and when the trains are most
crowded. Some call this a cynical and
unfair policy because it exploits the fact
that commuters have to travel then, and
will pay whatever is charged and put up
with the over-crowding because there
is no alternative. But it is perfectly fair,
as well as necessary, to do this. For one
thing it is simply market forces at work.
For another it is the only way the system
can function at a profit. During off-peak
periods people are travelling from choice
and would not travel at all if there were
no cheap fares. But the cheap fares
would not be economical for the
transport companies unless they can
be subsidised by high fares at peak
times.
Which of the following best expresses the
conclusion of the argument?
A It is fair and necessary to charge
commuters the highest fares.
B Charging commuters peak rates is the
only system that will work.
C It is cynical and unfair to charge
commuters more than other travellers.
D Train companies exploit commuters
because they have to travel at peak
times.
E Cheap fares would not be economical
without the subsidy of peak-time fares.

3 Meat eaters, in defence of their eating
habits, often give the excuse that they
(and we) do not have the teeth or the
stomachs of natural herbivores, and
therefore we must be carnivores. This
is nonsense. We may not have the
digestive equipment to eat raw grasses,
but nor do we have the teeth and
digestion systems of predators: we are as
far removed from the wolf as we are from
the horse. Seeds, nuts, berries, leaves and
roots are the natural diet of our closest
relatives in the animal kingdom.

Which of the following best expresses the
conclusion of the argument?
A It is nonsense to say that we must be
carnivores.
B Seeds, nuts, berries, leaves and roots
are our natural diet.
C We do not have the teeth or stomachs
of predatory animals.
D We are no more like wolves than we are
like horses.
E Eating meat is a disgusting habit.
Answers and comments are on pages 313–14.

2.7 Conclusions

57

2.8 Reasons
Reasons are expressions which tell us why
something is as it is. Their primary function
is to explain. Recall the example you first
considered in Chapter 2.2:
[1] Sea levels are rising around the world
because global warming is melting the
polar ice caps.
This complex claim offers an explanation for
rising sea levels. As you have seen, it consists of
two simple sentences joined by the connective
‘because’. Grammatically, therefore, [1] looks
very much like an argument, with the second
sentence being given as a reason for the first. It
could even be rephrased with ‘so’ or ‘therefore’
as the connective:
[1a] Global warming is melting the polar ice
caps and therefore sea levels are
rising . . .
But the claim that global warming is melting
the ice is not a reason in the sense of a premise.
[1] and [1a] do not make the argument that sea
levels are rising: they assert why sea levels are
rising. This is an important difference. The
claim that the seas are rising is not a
conclusion in need of support, but a claim to
fact in need of an explanation.
Compare:
[2] Global warming must be happening
because the polar ice is melting and sea
levels are rising.
Superficially there is not a lot of difference
between [1] and [2]. Again in [2] we see two
claims connected by the word ‘because’,
indicating that the second is being given as a
reason for the first. But this time global
warming is not being explained by rising sea
levels: rising sea levels are being offered as

58

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

grounds (or evidence) for arguing that global
warming is taking place. The phrase ‘must be’
helps us to see that the author is urging the
reader to accept the claim. But even without
this clue it is quite obvious that rising seas
could not be the cause of global warming,
whereas it makes good sense to offer rising
seas as evidence of global warming. It may not
be conclusive evidence, but it is supportive.
What we learn from this is that the word
‘reason’ is ambiguous, depending upon
whether it is a reason why (as in an
explanation), or a reason for (as in an
argument). This can make it quite hard on
occasions to be sure whether a set of
sentences is expressing an argument or giving
an explanation, especially if there are no
indicator words (such as ‘because’, ‘therefore’,
‘for this reason’) to label the sentences.

Reasons as premises
Premises are claims from which a conclusion is
said to follow. But ‘follows’ in this sense means
more than just coming after. When we say a
conclusion follows from certain premises, we
mean that it follows logically. In naturallanguage arguments the premises can appear
before or after the conclusion: it is only in
standard form that the conclusion is always at
the end.
What we mean by ‘follows from’ is that if
the premises are true, the conclusion must be
true too. If the conclusion does not follow
from the premises, then even if the premises
are true, the conclusion might be false. So a
really good argument is one in which the
premises are true and the conclusion does
follow. That is why, in a good argument, the
premises are reasons for believing, or agreeing
with, the conclusion.

In logic the term ‘premises’ is preferred over
‘reasons’. In critical thinking it tends to be the
other way around, although there are
exceptions. This is because critical thinking is
a less formal subject than logic. In this book
we have used both words, and up until now
treated them as having roughly the same
meaning when used in connection with
arguments. However, there are differences
which sometimes make one term more
appropriate to use than the other. ‘Premise’,
being the more formal word, is defined by its
position in an argument – literally meaning
‘placed before’ – whereas a reason is
identifiable more by its meaning: what it
claims. Logicians often work with symbols
rather than sentences. In an argument such as:
P & Q therefore R
‘P’ and ‘Q’ are premises. But nothing about these
letters makes them recognisable as reasons for
‘R’. You would have to know what ‘P’ and ‘Q’
stand for – and ‘R’ too – before you could
recognise them as grounds for believing R.

Relevance
For one thing, a premise cannot be understood
as a reason for a conclusion unless it is relevant
to the conclusion. Suppose someone tried to
argue that:
[3] Seawater is salty, so Mars is a planet!
The premise of this ‘argument’ is true, and so
is the conclusion. But knowing that seawater
is salty gives no reason to believe that Mars is
a planet, since the two claims are completely
unrelated. In [3] the second claim is known as
a ‘non sequitur’, because it does not follow
from the premise in any logical sense of the
word, even though both claims are true. Nor,
for that matter, does the saltiness of water
explain why Mars is a planet.
Compare with the following argument:
[4] Mars is a planet since it can be seen to
orbit the Sun.

Its orbiting of the Sun justifies the claim that
Mars is a planet. If I did not already know that
Mars was a planet, [4] would give me a reason
to believe it (provided I knew that planets are
objects that revolve around suns).
To summarise so far, there are two ways in
which a claim can be understood as a reason:
as grounds for drawing a conclusion, or as an
explanation. Usually you can tell from the
meanings of sentences what their functions
are, or from the context surrounding them.
Sometimes, however, it is quite difficult to tell,
especially if a short passage is taken out of
context. But there is another complication,
too: sometimes argument and explanation are
both recognisable in a text at the same time.
Indeed sometimes an argument consists of an
explanation. Some or all of these complications
are reflected in the following examples.

Activity
Discuss the following pairs of sentences.
Can either of the sentences in each case be
understood as a reason for the other? If so,
what kind of reason?
[5] Tax rises are not vote-winners. In
the last four decades, every time a
government has raised taxes, their
poll-ratings have fallen significantly.
[6] The government will not raise taxes
this close to a general election. The
result could be very close and tax
rises are not vote-winners.
[7] The accused was at her desk in the
office at 3 p.m. but no one reported
seeing her again until after 4. That
was plenty of time to get to the
scene of the crime and back.

Commentary
We’ll take these examples in turn, starting
with [5]. This is not exactly a trick question,
but it is a tricky one. The straight answer is
that either of the sentences could be

2.8 Reasons

59

understood as a reason for the other,
depending on whether you interpret [5] as an
argument or as an explanation. You might
wonder how anyone can decide whether [5] is
an argument or an explanation without
knowing which of the sentences is the reason.
This is a very good question. Without some
context – which we do not have – the clues
are insufficient for us to work out what point
the author is making. It might be that the first
sentence is meant to explain why tax-raising
governments have experienced a slide in the
polls; or the slide in the polls may be meant as
evidence that tax rises are not vote-winners.
Both make reasonably good sense, so even the
principle of charity is little help. The right
answer with regard to [5] is that it is
ambiguous.
The next example, [6], is an interesting one.
It is plainly an argument. The first sentence is
a prediction. The second supplies two reasons
(joined by ‘and’) which can be taken as
support for the prediction. This is a perfectly
acceptable interpretation of [6]. But would it
not be just as accurate to say that the two
reasons in the second sentence are explaining
why the government will not raise taxes close
to an election? If so, then it would seem that
[6] is both an argument and an explanation;
or that the explanation is an argument (and
vice versa).
And that is the right answer. What [6]
illustrates is that one way of supporting a
conclusion is to offer an explanation for it. By
explaining it, successfully, the author also
makes it more believable. The boundary
between argument and explanation is not
always a clean line. If the relationship between
the two concepts were represented in a Venn
diagram (see Chapter 3.5), it would look like
this, with [6] in the intersection:
Argument

Explanation
[6]

60

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

Example [7] is another very interesting case. If
either of the sentences is a reason for the other
it looks like it is the first. You might have
decided that the time lapse between sightings
of the accused is being stated to explain how
she managed to get to the crime scene and
back. Or you might have thought that the
sightings were evidence that she had plenty of
time, making [7] an argument of sorts, with
the second sentence as the conclusion.
But there is a third, more plausible reading,
namely that neither of the sentences explains or
supports the other. They are related by being
part of the same story, but aside from that they
are really independent claims. The first is that
no one reported seeing the accused for an hour;
the second that an hour was time to get to the
crime scene and back. But if the second claim is
true then it is true whether or not anyone saw
the accused between 3 and 4 p.m. (If there is an
explanation it would be about the distance of
the crime scene from the office, or how long it
would take to get there.) And the claim that no
one saw the accused between 3 and 4 p.m. has
nothing to do with the accessibility of the
crime scene. Any attempt to make an argument
out of [7] would result in a non sequitur – where
the supposed conclusion does not follow from
the premises. A non sequitur, as we know, is a
bad argument. So, on the principle of charity,
we have little justification for calling [7] an
argument or an explanation.

An implied conclusion
What could be said about [7] is that it is
leading towards some form of accusation. If
some conclusion (or inference) were drawn
from [7], that would make it an argument. For
example, [7] could lead to the inference that
the accused had had the time, or the
opportunity, to commit the crime. However,
this is such an obvious inference to draw that
it does not need to be stated explicitly. We
could think of it as something a prosecuting
counsel might leave unsaid, and let the jury
members make the inference themselves.

On that interpretation [7] consists of two
reasons and an implied (implicit) conclusion.
In standard form:
[7a] R1 The accused was at her desk in
the office at 3 p.m. but no one
reported seeing her again until
after 4.
R2 That was plenty of time to get to
the scene of the crime and back.
  C (implied) The accused had the
opportunity to commit the crime.
In practice many arguments are left
unfinished in this way. Sometimes it makes
for a more persuasive case if the audience,
rather than the author, is left to draw the
conclusion. Two questions that are frequently
set in critical thinking assignments are:
 hat conclusion can be drawn, reliably, from
W
such-and-such a claim, or claims?
Or:
How reliable (or safe) would it be to draw
such-and-such a conclusion?
You might like to discuss the second question
with reference to the implicit conclusion
in [7a].

Are reasons always claims?
In a word, yes. This does not mean that reasons
are always grammatical statements (declarative
sentences). As we saw in Chapter 2.1, a claim
can be made using a rhetorical question or
even an imperative sentence. For instance, the
prosecutor could have asked the jury:
‘Did anyone see the accused at her desk
between 3 and 4 p.m.?’
and mean it as a claim. It would be very hard,
if not impossible, to think of a reason or
premise, however it is expressed
grammatically, that does not have the

meaning of a claim. It is also difficult to see
how a genuine question – with no obvious
answer – could be grounds for a conclusion.
What about conclusions? Could the
conclusion of an argument be a genuine
question or command? This is a more
debatable point. Obviously there are plenty
of examples where people give reasons for
demanding something. Take the following
well-known example:
[8] Shoot her! She’s a spy.
It makes perfectly good sense to call this an
argument to justify an order. On the other
hand, it also makes sense to interpret the
conclusion of [8] as a claim: for example, ‘She
should be shot’ or ‘You must shoot her’. The
question is whether you want to call ‘Shoot
her!’ a genuine command, or just a way of
asserting something. Since both
interpretations are equally defensible, you
must make up your own mind.

Summary
• There are two senses of the word ‘reason’,
depending on whether it is found in an
argument in support of the conclusion, or
in an explanation.
• However, the boundary between argument
and explanation is often blurred, making
interpretation quite difficult at times.
Note: it should be becoming more and more
evident as you progress through this book that
not all critical thinking questions have plainly
right or wrong answers. Being critical takes
judgement. What matters in many cases is being
able to back up your judgements with reasons of
your own. In a critical thinking assignment, the
same credit may be given for two quite different
answers, if both are equally well argued.

2.8 Reasons

61

End-of-chapter assignments
1 No team has come back from being
three games down in the World Series,
so can the Red Sox still win?

4 Try to find – or invent – an argument in
which the conclusion is supported by an
explanatory reason (or reasons).

	Is this an argument? Explain why this is
a problem question, and write a short
paragraph justifying your answer.

5 No one has anything to fear from giving
the police random stop-and-search
powers so long as they have nothing
to hide. If you are carrying a knife or
gun or stolen goods, then of course it’s
a different story. Opponents of the bill
to grant the police more wide-ranging
powers can only be helping to protect
the guilty.

2 Some students in a San Francisco art
school were told they were about to see
an example of prize-winning modern
art and were then shown a photograph
of a pile of discarded drinks containers.
It was nothing more than garbage, but
the students took it quite seriously and
agreed that it was worthy of an award.
	Suggest a conclusion which could be
drawn from the above claims.
3 Just look at the statistics and see for
yourself how crime has been rising
over the past few years. Could there be
any clearer signal that the current soft
approach to offenders isn’t working?
Either the courts get back to zerotolerance and harsher sentencing, or we
face defeat in the war on crime.
	Identify the reasons and conclusion in
the above argument, and comment on the
grammar of the sentences used to
express them. Then translate the argument
into standard form.

62

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

	How would you interpret the above
passage? Is it an argument? If so, what is
its conclusion? If it isn’t an argument, why
isn’t it?
Answers and comments are on page 314.

2.9 Assumptions
An assumption is a claim or belief that is
accepted as true, even if it hasn’t been
proven or justified. Another similar word
is ‘presumption’.
We often assume (presume) something just
because there is no reason not to believe it,
even though we cannot be certain that it is
actually true. Suppose, for example, I have five
banknotes in my wallet, each for 20 euros. I
have come by them in a normal way, so I
assume they are genuine – as anyone would
unless there were some particular reason to
think otherwise. It is perfectly rational to make
this assumption because the vast majority of
banknotes we receive are genuine. Yet I know,
as well as anyone else, that some banknotes in
circulation are forgeries. Therefore, although
my assumption is a reasonable one, it is not
entirely justified; nor entirely safe. Under most
circumstances it will be true; but in others it
may be false.
This is the ordinary meaning of
‘assumption’, deriving from the verb ‘assume’.
An assumption differs from an assertion in that
an assumption doesn’t have to be stated –
although it can be. In order to make an
assertion I have to say something explicitly.
But I can make an assumption without saying
anything, or even consciously thinking it. In
fact, in the above case, I would probably give
no conscious thought whatever to the
genuineness of the notes in my wallet, unless
or until someone questioned it. My
assumption that they were genuine would be
evident in my behaviour: for example, taking
the money out to pay for something – without
a second’s thought. You could say that the
assumption I was making was implicit in
my behaviour.

Two kinds of ‘assumption’
We can see therefore that an assumption can
be explicit (stated) or implicit (unstated). This
raises an important distinction, because in
critical thinking, both kinds of assumption
play major roles. Unfortunately, in some
critical thinking textbooks, the impression is
given that ‘assumption’ always means
something unstated, and therefore implied,
whereas it is quite clear that in many if not
most arguments the premises themselves are
no more than assumptions. Unless a premise
is a known fact, the best that can be said of it
is that it is an assumption.
Take the following argument:
[1] The technology for detecting forgeries has
improved in recent years. Unfortunately,
the skills and techniques of the forger are
more than keeping pace. So we are going
to see ever-increasing amounts of
counterfeit money in circulation.
The conclusion (C) is the last sentence; and the
single premise (P) is the sentence before. (The
first sentence is just context.) So, it is argued, C
follows from the explicit claim that forgery is
improving faster than detection. But what are
the grounds for that claim? We are given none.
It may be true, of course. But equally it may be
false or exaggerated. Ultimately we have to take
P on trust if we want to accept the conclusion.
It is in that sense that we treat P as an
assumption, not a fact.
But there is more to be said about [1]. For even
if we assume that P is true, it is insufficient to
establish the conclusion fully. C is a strong claim
predicting that we will see increasing amounts of
forged money. That follows from P only if the
skills and techniques of the forger continue to

2.9 Assumptions

63

advance ahead of detection; or, alternatively, if
the technology for detection does not catch up
in the foreseeable future. The fact that forgery is
outstripping detection at present does not mean
the balance won’t change. By drawing the
conclusion that we are ‘going to see everincreasing amounts of counterfeit money’, the
author is assuming more than he or she is
saying. And because these assumptions about
the future are extremely questionable, [1] is not a
reliable argument.

Hidden premises
Another way to think of implicit assumptions
is as missing, or hidden, premises. They are
premises because they are necessary for the
success and soundness of the argument. They
are hidden because they are unstated. In the
example above, there was at least one hidden
premise that was unwarranted, making the
argument as a whole unacceptable. But
implicit assumptions need not always be
detrimental to an argument.
Here is another case to consider, on the
same topic:
[2] These banknotes all have the same
serial number, so they can’t be genuine.

64

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

Is this a sound argument? As it stands, no: it is
incomplete. Without an additional premise, to
the effect that genuine banknotes have unique
numbers, the conclusion does not follow from
the single, stated premise. (If all, or even some,
genuine banknotes had duplicate numbers,
then obviously the first clause of [2] would not
be a good reason for claiming that the notes
weren’t genuine.) In [2], therefore, it is
implicitly assumed that if the banknotes were
all genuine they would have different
numbers. And because it is necessary to
assume this for the argument to make sense,
we treat it like an unspoken premise.
In standard form:
[2a] R	(stated)
		These banknotes all have the same
serial number.
A (unstated)
		Genuine banknotes all have unique
serial numbers.
		
C	These banknotes can’t all be
genuine.
By contrast with the claims in [1], R and A are
both well justified: R by the photographic

evidence; A by common knowledge. Moreover,
A is arguably true by definition, since a ‘serial’
number means one number in a series.
Therefore, although [2] in its original form is
incomplete, when we add in the obvious
assumption, we see that what is intended is a
good and plausible argument.
Interestingly, the same conclusion could
have been reached by stating A and assuming R:
[3] Genuine banknotes would have different
serial numbers, so these notes can’t be
genuine.
Again the single premise makes sense as a
reason for the conclusion only if it assumes
that some of the banknotes in question have
the same number. In [3] this is not stated, but
only because it does not need to be. We can
understand the argument perfectly well
without it.
Remember that, under the principle of
charity, we start from the presumption that
the author of an argument is as rational as we
are, and would not have left out a crucial
premise through carelessness or stupidity, but
would have meant it to be taken as read.

Identifying implicit assumptions
In the examples we have examined so far it
would be very difficult not to recognise the
implicit assumptions. But with longer and
more complex arguments it can require careful
and thorough analysis. Consider, for example,
the following passage:
[4] In the days before the arrival of the
internet, publishers and booksellers
effectively controlled what people read,
since very few would-be authors could
afford the high financial risks of
publishing themselves. The internet
has changed all that, with Facebook and
Twitter leading the charge. Now anyone
can express their views publicly, or
distribute information, at little or no cost,
and without the tyranny of censorship.

	Those who are fearful of the internet
should therefore stop worrying about its
dangers and acknowledge that, on
balance, its growth is in the public
interest, not against it. For, almost at a
stroke, it has given us freedom of
information on a scale that could never
previously have been imagined.

Activity
Analyse the above argument so that you are
clear about its reasons and conclusion. Then
decide which of the following is a key
underlying but unstated assumption. (There
is only one correct answer.)
A There are some reasons to be worried
about the internet.
B Freedom of information is in the public
interest.
C The internet is here to stay.
D Everyone has the right to publish their
opinions.

Commentary
In simplified form the argument runs as
follows:
R Now anyone can express views publicly or
distribute information at little cost.
IC The internet has given us freedom of
information on an unimaginable scale.
C Those who are fearful of the internet
should . . . acknowledge that its growth is
in the public interest.
The first two sentences of the passage can be
interpreted either as background information
or as additional reasons to supplement the
sub-argument, from R to IC. Either way the
main argument is from IC to C. This step
works only if we assume that freedom of
information is itself in the public interest,

2.9 Assumptions

65

since that is the reason given for saying
that the internet benefits the public. If it
could be shown that on balance freedom of
information is not in the public interest – i.e.
that it did more harm than good – then the
argument would be considerably weakened.
Option B plainly expresses this assumption;
so, out of the four, it is the correct answer.
None of the other claims is required by the
argument, even if it is suggested or indirectly
implied. A, for example, is something that
the author apparently acknowledges, given
that he says that we should stop worrying. But
A is not essential to the conclusion for which
the author is arguing. It is just a passing
remark. His argument would be no less sound
if there were no reasons to worry: in other
words if A were false. If anything, it would be
stronger. So clearly A is not an assumption
required for, or helpful to, the argument.
C is not implied at all. According to the
author, the internet has brought with it
freedom of information and expression. But
that does not mean that it will continue to do
so, or that other technology will not replace it.
You might have been tempted by D. It may
seem reasonable to assume that freedom of
expression etc. is an entitlement, and so it
may be. But the argument here is that the
freedom of expression afforded by the internet
has benefits that are in the public interest, not
against it; and that therefore it should not be
feared. To draw that conclusion, it is not
necessary to assume that such freedoms are a
right. D claims more than is required for the
argument; it goes too far.

Missing pieces
Sometimes a key premise is omitted from an
argument, not because it goes without saying,
but because it suits the author to leave it
out, perhaps because it is a questionable
assumption and the author may prefer not to
draw attention to it by making it explicit. To
see an example in which this might be the
case, we return to the argumentative text you

66

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

first encountered in Chapter 2.6 about prize
money in tennis. Here it is again:
[5] Top women tennis players used to
grumble that their prize money was less
substantial than that paid to top male
players in the same competition. They
argued that they were being unequally
treated. But the disparity was entirely
justified and should never have been
abolished. Male players just have more
prowess than women. They need to win
three sets out of five to take the match;
the women only two. They have to play
harder and faster, and expend far more
energy on court than the women. But
most of all, if the best woman in the
tournament played any of the men, there
would be no contest: the man would win.
This argument has two steps. (There is a full
analysis of it on pages 47–8 in Chapter 2.6.)
The first step, or sub-argument, is clearly
intended to establish that the men have more
physical prowess than the women. It gives
three reasons for this claim, including the
explicit assumption that any of the men in a
major tournament would beat even the best
woman. Let’s assume firstly that these claims
are true and that they do show that the men
have greater tennis-playing prowess. The next
step – the main argument – is that therefore
the differences in prize money were just, and
should not have been abolished.
It is here, in the main argument, that a
crucial premise has been left out. For it raises
the question: why should this difference in
physical strength and so on determine the
prize money? And that question in turn shows
us what is being smuggled into the argument
without being stated. For the argument only
succeeds if it is justified to say that prize
money should depend on prowess, and so,
in turn, on factors such as power and speed.
Suppose the women were to object that
these factors are irrelevant, and to argue
that their game is actually more entertaining

than the men’s and attracts as many, if not
more, spectators and television viewers. If the
women bring no fewer fans, and no less
money into the sport, they should have no less
reward than the men get for their brute force!
Superficially [5] looks like a fairly strong
case, until you look below the surface and see
what is being assumed. The fact is there are
many criteria which could be used to
determine prize money. The author of [5]
relies on just one: one which, of course,
favours the men, and therefore suits his own
argument. This might also explain why the
author has omitted to add, in so many words,
that ‘muscle’ should be the decider. Since he
has no grounds to support that assumption
perhaps it seemed better not to state it openly,
and thereby invite an obvious challenge.
Whether or not the omission was
intentional makes no difference. It is a
seriously inadequate argument, either way,
simply because the unstated assumption is
unwarranted.

Deep-rooted assumptions
In some arguments, such as [4] or [5], what is
assumed is a matter of opinion. You could
easily imagine someone who initially thought
freedom of information was a good thing
changing her mind after seeing websites that
encourage violence, racism or gross indecency.
You could also imagine someone moving the
other way and deciding that freedom of
information is a good thing, and that it should
be encouraged even if some minority groups
abuse it.
But in other cases the assumptions we
make are more deeply rooted or unshakable.
Many arguments make assumptions based on
strong beliefs, strict laws, political leanings, or
shared cultural attitudes and loyalties that we
grow up with and keep for a lifetime. Realising
when an argument rests on assumptions
which we take more or less for granted, and
rarely question, is an important part of critical
thinking and intelligent debate.

Activity
Read the following passage and discuss one
or more major assumptions underlying the
argument. Consider too how someone might
oppose this argument.
[6] After a much-publicised legal battle,
Harvey and Hanah Steinberg watched
with satisfaction as a family of
travellers was forcibly escorted off the
corner of their 12,000-hectare estate
where the group had been living in a
mobile home for 18 months. Not
before time. It had taken four appeals
and cost the Steinbergs a small fortune
in legal fees, but justice had prevailed
in the end. The travellers claimed they
were following a nomadic way of life
going back thousands of years, but
their ways show no respect for private
property or the rule of law. They did
not have the landowners’ permission,
and they did not pay rent. The
Steinbergs therefore have nothing to
be ashamed of in prosecuting the
trespassers, and the court did the right
thing in ordering their eviction.

Commentary
The deep assumptions in this passage are about
property rights. The author clearly presumes
that property owners, like the Steinbergs, have
right completely on their side to choose who
can and cannot stay on their land; and just as
clearly assume that travellers have no
comparable rights to live the life they choose if
it means infringing property laws. There is also
an assumption that trespassing is not only
illegal (which in this case is a fact), but wrong
(which is a value judgement). Without this
assumption it would not follow that the
Steinbergs had ‘nothing to be ashamed of’, or
that the court did ‘right’ – as well as enforcing
the law – to order the eviction.

2.9 Assumptions

67

The fact that the author assumes all this
rather than stating it, or offering any argument
for it, indicates that he or she simply takes it
for granted, and no doubt expects that many if
not all readers will do the same. In the culture
to which the author belongs there are laws that
protect property and punish trespass, and the
majority accept such laws because it is in their
interests to do so. Laws that prevent travellers
from setting up home wherever they like also
prevent them from moving into your house or
setting up camp in your front garden.
Consequently, people who own or rent homes
of their own tend to accept such laws, and
assume they have some moral backing, even if
at times they seem harsh. The author does not
see any need to spell all this out or argue for it.
It ‘goes without saying’.
But that doesn’t mean the argument or its
assumptions cannot be challenged. Not every
social group adopts the same attitudes to
private property as the author. There are
people who choose to live, or would prefer to
live, nomadic lifestyles without permanent
homes, who might start from the entirely

opposite assumption that no one has the right
to own a piece of land and keep others from
using it, especially a large estate like the
Steinbergs’. Many people seriously question
the assumption that trespass is morally (and
not just legally) wrong, or that trespass laws are
just laws, or that anyone needs ‘permission’ to
set up a home where they choose. One might
argue that the Steinbergs showed a complete
lack of compassion in prosecuting the family:
that they used their money and power to evict
underprivileged people, of minority ethnic
status, for no obviously good reason other
than exercising their legal right. Some might
say that the Steinbergs have everything to be
ashamed of, and certainly much more to be
ashamed of than the travellers.
How you evaluate and respond to an
argument like this depends very much on
your own political and cultural assumptions.
But whichever side you take on the issues,
you will not have dealt critically with the
argument unless you have recognised and
given thought to these assumptions as well as
the explicit premises.

Summary
• An assumption, under the ordinary
meaning of the word, is a claim or belief
that is presumed true, without necessarily
being warranted or justified.
• The premises of many arguments are
assumptions. In other words the conclusion
of an argument often rests on one or more
assumptions. If the assumption can be
shown to be false or unwarranted, then the
argument must be judged unsound.

68

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

• Some assumptions that are made in the
course of an argument are implicit rather
than openly stated.
• Calling a claim or belief an assumption
means that it is questionable, open to
challenge, or in need of justification. It
does not mean that it is necessarily false
or unacceptable.
• Some assumptions reveal deep-rooted
beliefs or attitudes.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Study each of the following arguments and
say which of the multiple-choice options
below it are implicit assumptions on which
the argument depends. To make it more
interesting, there may be more than one
right answer.
a R
 aisa will hate this book. For a start
it’s non-fiction, not a novel. But worse
still it’s all about mountain-climbing.
A Raisa hates non-fiction.
B Raisa hates mountain-climbing.
C Raisa likes novels.
b N
 ashida is claiming compensation from
her former employers on the grounds
that she was forced to leave her job.
The employers are saying that they did
not actually dismiss Nashida. However,
they do admit that they altered the
terms and conditions of her job. The
law allows that, if employees are forced
to accept changes in their working
conditions that mean they would suffer
as a result, and for that reason only they
choose to leave, then their entitlement
to compensation is the same as if they
had been dismissed. Therefore Nashida’s
claim should be upheld.
A Nashida would have suffered as a
result of the changes to her job.
B Nashida had done nothing to
deserve dismissal.
C Nashida would not have left if the
job changes had been favourable.
D Nashida had no choice about the
changes that were made to her job.
OCR (adapted)
c ‘Alcopop’ is the name given to a range
of drinks that contain alcohol but taste
like fruit drinks. Their sale in the shops
has been blamed for a recorded rise in
alcohol consumption by children and
young people, and with good reason.
It is common sense that if you make

alcohol sweet and fruit-flavoured you
are encouraging children to drink it.
Therefore its sale should be banned.
A Alcopops were manufactured
specially to appeal to children.
B Children of an early age do not like
the taste of alcohol.
C Children like the taste of sweet,
fruit-flavoured drinks.
D Sweet drinks do not appeal as
much to adults as to children.
OCR
2 Read the following argument and suggest
one or more hidden assumptions that it
relies on:
 he internet has brought many
T
advantages. It is a wonderful source of
knowledge and, used intelligently, it
provides for a healthy exchange of
views. But history will prove that the
internet is a far greater force for harm
than for good. Its great flaw is that the
information on it is not, and indeed
cannot be, regulated. Anyone can access
it and anything can be published on it,
freely and at little or no cost.
3 D
 o you agree or disagree with the following
statement – and why?
	
Every argument must make at least

one unstated assumption.
4 With reference to argument [6]:
Either have a class or group discussion
and debate the motion:
 he Steinbergs have nothing to be
T
ashamed of in evicting the travellers
from their land.
Or write a short argument for or against
the above motion.
Answers and comments are on pages 314–15.

2.9 Assumptions

69

2.10 Flaws and fallacies
A good argument is one that satisfies
two rules.
Rule 1 is that the reasons should be true.
We cannot trust an argument that is based on
false premises. If we know that one or more
of the premises are false, we must reject
the argument.
Rule 2 is that the conclusion must follow
recognisably from the reasons, meaning that if
the reasons are all true, the conclusion cannot
be false.
An argument that passes both these tests is
said to be sound. An argument that fails one or
both of them is unsound. Interestingly we use
the same words to talk about structures like
boats or buildings, and more abstract objects
such as ideas, advice or plans. When you
describe something as sound, what you are
saying about it is that it is safe, reliable, free of
faults. You would not call a boat sound if it had
a hole in it and sank ten minutes after setting off
from the shore. You would not call a plan sound
if it led to a disaster. And you don’t call an
argument sound if it leads to a false or dubious
conclusion. (A bad argument is often said to
have a hole in it – something missing from the
reasoning.) Nor do you call an argument sound
if you know, or have reason to believe, that one
or more of its premises are false.
Another word for an unsound argument is
‘flawed’. A flaw is a fault. There are two main
ways in which you can find fault with an
argument. You can disagree with one or more
of the reasons; and/or you can show that,
whether the reasons are true or not, the
conclusion doesn’t follow from them.
Arguments that are unsound for this second
reason are said to contain ‘reasoning errors’, or
‘flaws in the reasoning’. They are also called

70

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

‘fallacies’. A fallacy is a flawed line of
reasoning. Because it is very often not possible
to know the truth or otherwise of the
premises, most of the critical evaluation of
arguments focuses on the reasoning, and
whether it is sound or fallacious. (If you know
that either the reasons or the conclusion is
false, there is no further critical thinking to do
on the argument!)
Note: the word ‘fallacy’ is often used
casually to mean a false or mistaken claim.
For example, after 1912 a person might have
said, ‘It was a complete fallacy that the Titanic
was unsinkable.’ In critical thinking, or any
formal context, ‘fallacy’ is never used that
way. A fallacy is always a defective argument.

Activity
Read the following argument and decide
whether or not the reasoning is flawed. If it is
flawed, explain what you think the flaw is.
[1] The outstanding success of Amulk’s
company, which was launched against
the advice and without the support of
bankers, business consultants and
financiers, just goes to show that one
person’s vision can prove all the experts
in the world wrong. Anyone thinking of
setting up in business should therefore
trust their own judgement, and not be
influenced by the advice of others.

Commentary
First we need to analyse the argument so as to
identify the conclusion and the reasons. Then
we need to ask whether or not the conclusion
follows from the reasons, according to Rule 2.

The conclusion is the second sentence. The
first, longer sentence is the reasoning given
in support of it. On inspection we can see
that this long sentence really contains three
claims rolled into one. So a full analysis of it
would be:
R1 Amulk’s company is/was an outstanding
success.
R2 It was launched against the advice of
bankers . . . etc.
	
IC One person’s vision can prove all the
experts in the world wrong.
	
C Anyone thinking of setting up in business
should trust their own judgement, and not
be influenced by the advice of others.
We don’t know whether or not the two initial
reasons, R1 and R2, are true, but we’ll assume
that they are. There is no reason to believe
they are untrue. If they are true then it does
seem that IC is also true; for if Amulk’s
company really was such a success, and the
bankers and others all advised against it, then
it seems fair to say one man’s success
(Amulk’s) can prove the experts wrong. It
means assuming that the bankers and others
are ‘experts’, but we can let that pass. So we
can accept that the first stage of the argument
is sound.
The big question is whether the main
conclusion follows from the intermediate one
(IC). This time the answer is ‘No’. Even if
everything we are told is true, we cannot
conclude from this one single example of
success, or from this one misjudgement by the
‘experts’, that anyone setting up in business
should ignore expert advice. It would be a
crazy conclusion to draw, a reckless thing to
do. It would be like arguing as follows:
[2] Beth passed all her exams without doing
any work. So anyone taking an exam
should stop studying!

Not studying may have worked for Beth, just
as ignoring advice worked for Amulk, but that
doesn’t mean it will work for anyone else – let
alone everyone.

Generalising from the particular
It is easy enough to see that [1] and [2] contain
a serious flaw in the reasoning, one that makes
the conclusion unreliable. It is also easy to see
that it is the same kind of flaw in each case,
even though the contexts are different. But
what exactly is the flaw? How do we identify it?
[1] and [2] are both examples of a very
common flaw. It is known as generalising from
the particular. We call something a particular if
it is just one instance, or one of a limited
number of instances. The particular in [1] is the
success of one company. In [2] it is a single
person’s exam results. Neither of these is a
strong enough reason to support a sweeping
generalisation. (See also Chapter 2.2.)

Arguing from anecdotal evidence
Another way in which you could describe the
flaw in both of these arguments is to say that
they rely on anecdotal evidence. An anecdote
is a story, usually just one among many, often
different, stories. So a piece of anecdotal
evidence is a kind of particular; and arguing
from anecdotal evidence can be a reasoning
error if the conclusion is an unwarranted
generalisation.
However, anecdotal evidence can support
some conclusions. Look, for example, at this
next argument:
[3] Three people fell through the ice last
winter when they were walking across the
lake. Seriously, you should think twice
before you try to cross it.
If the anecdote – the first sentence – is true,
then it is a sound argument, and its
conclusion is sound advice. There is nothing
wrong with the evidence in [3], even though
it is still purely anecdotal. The fact of three

2.10 Flaws and fallacies

71

people falling through the ice last year is a
very good reason for thinking twice about
walking on it now, and it would be irrational
not to think twice about it, if you value your
safety and you believe the story. But compare
[3] with the following case, which uses
exactly the same evidence:
[4] Three people fell through the ice last
winter when they were walking across
the lake. You should never walk on
frozen lakes.

Activity
Discuss the difference between [3] and [4].

Commentary
[3] is a sound argument and [4] is not. [4] is
flawed, like [1] and [2], and in the same way:
its conclusion is too general to draw from one,
or even three, particular pieces of (anecdotal)
evidence. In the right conditions it is perfectly
safe to walk on frozen lakes, and people do it
regularly. What happened to the three
unfortunate people who fell through the ice
was no doubt caused by the conditions being
unsafe at that time. But it doesn’t mean, as [4]
concludes, that frozen lakes are never safe.

Insufficient reason
Another way to say what is wrong with [1],
[2] and [4] is that in each argument the
reason is insufficient or inadequate – i.e. not
strong enough – to support the conclusion. In
all three cases the argument goes too far, or
claims too much. In [3], by contrast, the
conclusion is much more limited in what it
claims: it just suggests a bit of caution.
Here we see again why the distinction
between strong and weak claims (Chapter 2.2,
page 25) is so important in evaluating some

72

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

arguments. Flaws occur when weak claims are
expected to provide support for strong claims.
Not surprisingly, strong claims need equally
strong, or stronger, claims to support them
adequately. ‘You should never walk on frozen
lakes’ is not just strong: it is indefensible. It
would need to be assumed that no freshwater
ice, however thick, could bear a person’s
weight – which is obviously unwarranted.
In the next example the story is a bit
different, and so is the conclusion.
[5] People cross this lake every year from
November through to March. The ice can
be anything up to a metre thick. People
drive cars across it. I’ve even seen
bonfires on the ice at New Year and folk
sitting round having a party. So there is
no risk of anyone ever falling through in
the middle of February.

Activity
Assuming the reasons are true, is this
argument sound, or does it have a flaw?

Commentary
This is a classic example of anecdotal evidence
being used carelessly. The reasons are
insufficient for the conclusion they are being
used to support, even if you add all four of the
reasons together. The fact that people have
done various things on the ice in the past,
and come to no harm, does not mean there is
never going to be a risk in the future. In fact,
if some scientists are right about global
warming, what has been observed about
frozen lakes up until now will not be very
reliable evidence in years to come. On many
lakes the ice in February may become thinner
and less safe – just like the reasoning in [5]!

Reasons

Conclusion

There is another way of identifying an error
of reasoning which does not describe the flaw
directly, but reveals or exposes it – shows it
up. It may be a counter-argument, an example
or explanation, or even a question.

Activity
A useful metaphor for an argument is a see-saw,
or balance arm, with reasons on one side and
the conclusion on the other. If the conclusion
is too strong, or asserts too much, the reasons
may not have sufficient ‘weight’ to support it.
For an argument to be sound the reasons must
outweigh the conclusion. In [5] they don’t
even counter-balance it. They are insufficient.

Identifying flaws
It is one thing being able to see that an
argument is flawed. It is another being able to
say what the flaw is. It is not enough just to
say that the reasons are insufficient or
inadequate, or that the conclusion doesn’t
follow from the reasons, because that is the
same as saying the argument is fallacious. We
need a deeper explanation.
In this unit you have seen two very
common reasoning errors. One was taking a
particular point (e.g. about one person’s
business experience) and drawing a general
conclusion from it (e.g. about how to start up
any business), as in argument [1]. Another,
illustrated in argument [5], involved using
past experience to draw an unwarranted
conclusion about the future.
Thus, if you were asked to describe the kind
of flaw that weakens [5] you could answer:
It assumes that what has been true in the
past remains true now, or in the future.
Or, with more specific reference to [5]:
It assumes that because people have walked
on the ice safely in February in the past, it is
always safe to do so.
Either of these would be a correct answer.

Recall the argument at the start of the
chapter:
 he outstanding success of Amulk’s
T
company, which was launched against
the advice and without the support of
bankers, business consultants and
financiers, just goes to show that one
person’s vision can prove all the experts
in the world wrong. Anyone thinking of
setting up in business should therefore
trust their own judgement, and not be
influenced by the advice of others.
Discuss each of the following responses to
this argument. Do any of them put a finger on
the flaw in the reasoning?
A Many people may have been put off
starting their own businesses because
they paid too much attention to the
advice of so-called experts.
B Business consultants and financiers
know far more about setting up in
business than the man in the street
knows.
C Might Amulk just have been lucky, or
the ‘experts’ to whom he spoke not
so expert?

Commentary
We will take the options one at a time. A does
not expose any flaw in the argument because if
it does anything at all it supports the argument.
It appears to sympathise with the conclusion
that people should trust their own judgement.
B looks much more of a challenge than A
did. But challenging an argument is not the

2.10 Flaws and fallacies

73

same as showing up its internal flaws. Even if
we accept that B is true, you could still argue
that Amulk’s experience proved them wrong
on this occasion. The flaw is not that Amulk
knew less than the experts, because nowhere in
the argument is it claimed that he knew
anything at all – only that he was successful.
The mistake is in drawing a conclusion about
other people’s chances of success from Amulk’s
success alone. So B does not point to the flaw.
That leaves C. C effectively raises a doubt
about the conclusion by suggesting that the
real explanation for Amulk’s success may
simply have been that he was lucky on this
one occasion. That way it would still be better
as a general rule to heed expert advice,
contrary to the conclusion of the argument.
Alternatively, in Amulk’s case, the particular
individuals who advised him may not have
been the best. Again, that does not mean that
going against advice is more likely to succeed
than following it. By identifying other
equally likely explanations for Amulk’s
success, C exposes a serious flaw in the
reasoning.

Drawing inferences
To infer something means to draw it as a
conclusion, usually from some evidence or
information. A sound or ‘safe’ inference is
one that is adequately supported by the
information. Otherwise it is unsafe. (Other
words you could use are ‘unreliable’,
‘unjustified’ or ‘unwarranted’, all of which
can be applied to claims generally.)
Consider the following report in a local
newspaper:
[6] Doctors investigating an outbreak of
suspected food poisoning discovered
that four of the people who had reported
sick had eaten at the Bayside fish
restaurant the day before; and all had
eaten fish. Any establishment that is
found to be responsible for food-related
sickness will be closed by the authorities

74

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

and not permitted to reopen until it has
been given a certificate of fitness from
hygiene inspectors. Today the Bayside is
closed.

Activity
Can any of the following claims safely or
reliably be inferred from the passage above?
A The source of the outbreak of food
poisoning was the Bayside fish
restaurant.
B Fish was the cause of the outbreak.
C The Bayside has been closed down by
the inspectors.

Commentary
According to the passage we have three facts:
• Four people who reported sick had
recently eaten at the Bayside.
• Any establishment responsible for foodrelated sickness is closed by the authorities.
• The Bayside is closed (today).
So, between them, do they justify any of the
three claims? We’ll take the claims in order,
starting with A. Although there is a suspected
link between the restaurant and the people
reporting symptoms, it cannot be inferred
that the restaurant was responsible for the
outbreak. If still in doubt, read [6] again.
Note, for example, that we are told nothing
about the four people other than that they
ate at the Bayside and then reported sick. It is
possible that there were other connections
between them: that they were all friends or
family and had shared other food and drink
besides the meal at the restaurant. Nor are we
told if there were others who were sick
besides the four who were mentioned in the
report. There may have been others who did
not report their illness. If there were others,
we do not know whether they had eaten at

the Bayside or somewhere else. The facts that
we have, even if true, do not support the
inference.
The same goes for inference B, that fish
caused the sickness. We are told that all four
of those who ate at the Bayside and reported
sick had eaten fish. But we are not told what
else they may have eaten or drunk. Even if the
Bayside was the source of the illness, which is
not certain, it need not have been the fish
that caused it. The cause may have been a side
dish, or a sauce, or contaminated water, or a
general lack of hygiene in the kitchen.
Nor is it safe to infer C, that the inspectors
closed the restaurant. The statement in the
newspaper that restaurants found responsible
for food-related sickness have to close is
actually irrelevant: it does not mean that
because a restaurant closes it is responsible for
the sickness. Many restaurants close on one or
more days of the week. Today may be the chef’s
day off. Many explanations for the closure are
possible besides the seemingly obvious one, that
it was closed because of food poisoning.

Jumping to conclusions
Often when people read of incidents like this
they infer too much, given what they know –
or rather, despite what they don’t know.
Without more than the information in the
report, it would be jumping to a conclusion to
draw any of the three proposed inferences
about the restaurant, its food, or the reasons
for its closure.
It is particularly tempting to jump to a
conclusion if you carry some prejudice in the
matter. Suppose, for example, you had eaten a
couple of times at the Bayside and had not
enjoyed the experience. Perhaps one of the
waiters had been rude, or the service had been
slow; or you just don’t like fish. In other words,
you had reasons to be critical of the restaurant,
but ‘reasons’ in the sense of motives rather
than reasons for a sound argument. With that
motivation, you argue as follows:

[7] I knew the Bayside was bad news. I’ve
never liked the food there, and certainly
never eaten the fish. Now we hear that
four people who went there have all
reported sick, and the next day the
restaurant is closed. So, it’s pretty clear
that their food is to blame. My
suspicions were correct all along.

A classic fallacy
A fallacy, you will recall, is a flawed
argument. It is also the word we use for the
flaw itself. We can say that [7] is a fallacy,
because it is a flawed argument. But we can
also say that it commits a fallacy, or has a
fallacy in it. Some fallacies appear over and
over again in different arguments. The
best-known examples were discovered and
classified centuries ago, and many have Latin
names. They are often referred to as the
classic fallacies, for that reason.
There is a classic fallacy lurking in [7], and
in the three inferences from [6] that we
discussed. It is known as the post hoc fallacy, or
in full: post hoc ergo propter hoc, meaning
literally: ‘after this, therefore because of this’.
The fallacy is in assuming that when one thing
happens and then another, that the first must
be the cause of, or reason for, the second. The
absurdity of this assumption can be illustrated
if we imagine someone opening an umbrella
just before it starts to rain, and arguing that
opening the umbrella made it rain! Of course,
there are many situations in which one act or
event does cause another. If a tree falls into the
road and a driver swerves to miss it, it is
perfectly reasonable to infer that the falling
tree caused the driver to swerve. The fallacy is
not that there is never a causal connection
between two events, but that a causal
explanation cannot and should not be
assumed, even when it looks quite plausible.
Indeed, it is when a causal explanation looks
quite plausible that the fallacy is most
dangerous, because it is then that people are

2.10 Flaws and fallacies

75

most likely to jump to a conclusion that may
be false.
[6] is a good example. We are told that a
number of people ate at a certain restaurant
and reported sick the next day, with suspected
food poisoning; then that the restaurant
closed. It is natural enough to assume that
eating in the restaurant caused the people to
be ill. People often justify such assumptions
by saying that there is no other explanation;
or that it is all too unlikely to be a
coincidence. But on reflection there often are
other possible explanations; and coincidences
do happen.

fallacy. There are not two different fallacies
there: just two different ways of describing the
same fallacy, one more general than the other.
One could say that there is a correlation
between the people dining at the restaurant
and the people reporting sick. Let’s suppose
the figures for people dining at the Bayside (B)
and reporting symptoms were as shown in the
following diagram:
Reported sick

Ate at B
44

4

0

Cause and correlation
The post hoc fallacy is itself an example of a
more general reasoning error known variously
as the ‘false cause’ or ‘mistaken cause’ or
‘cause–correlation fallacy’; or more
descriptively as confusing correlation with
cause. A correlation is any observed
connection between two claims or two facts,
particularly between two sets of data or trends.
For instance, if there were an observed upward
trend in violent crime in a city, at a time when
sales of violent computer games were on the
increase, it would be right to say there was
some correlation between the two trends.
It would also be tempting to conclude that
the games were at least a factor in causing the
actual violence to increase. Many people
make this inference, and not unreasonably,
since a significant number of computer games
have violent content. It is perfectly justified to
claim that if such games did turn out to be a
cause of violent crime it would be no surprise,
and it would help to explain the trend in a
convincing manner. But the plausibility of an
explanation does not make it true. It can be
posited as a reasonable hypothesis (see
Chapter 2.1), but not safely inferred.
The inferences from [6], and the reasoning
in [7], also exhibit the cause–correlation

76

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

There is a correlation – 4 out of the 4 who
reported sick had all eaten at the restaurant.
But it is a weak correlation: 44 ate there
without reporting sick, and although none
who did not eat there reported sick, we have
no information about those who may have
been sick but did not report it. We have a
plausible hypothesis. But to infer the Bayside’s
guilt from the data alone would be fallacious.
Arguments or inferences that assume causal
connections from correlations alone are
generally flawed.

Recognising and avoiding flaws
There are many other classic fallacies and
common reasoning errors besides those you
have seen in this chapter. Some have names
such as ‘slippery slope’ or ‘restricting the
options’ or argumentum ad hominem. Many of
these will feature in Unit 4, and you will learn
to recognise them, so that you can reject
unsound arguments and avoid making
similar errors in your own reasoning.
It is a good idea to keep a diary or notebook
of common flaws that you come across.
(There is a suggestion in the end-of-chapter
assignments on how to organise this.)

Summary
• An argument is flawed if the reason
or reasons given are untrue, or give
inadequate support to the conclusion.
• Some common flaws are:
• arguing from a particular case to a
general conclusion
• relying too heavily on anecdotal
evidence, or past experience
• mistaking a correlation for a cause.

There are many more flaws and fallacies
than these. In many flawed arguments you
will find that there is more than one way to
name or describe the fault.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Recent research suggests that, contrary to
popular belief, the firms that are making
the most money tend to have the least
happy workers. Therefore firms which
impose conditions that make workers
less happy can expect a rise in profits.
a Which of the following, if true, identifies
the flaw in the argument above?
A It assumes workers are unhappy
because of their work.
B It assumes that worker-unhappiness
is the cause of higher profits.
C It assumes that workers do not get a
share of the high profits.
D It assumes that successful managers
have to be hard on their staff.
b Which of the following, if true, would
weaken the argument above? (There
may be more than one.)
A It has been found that workers in rich
and successful companies become
resentful and disgruntled.
B It has been found that the owners
and managers of highly profitable
companies stop caring about the
welfare of employees.

C It has been found that companies
that try to make their employees
happy are not always financially
rewarded for their efforts.
2 The famous author Farrah Lavallier died
at the age of 98, just before finishing the
35th book of her distinguished literary
career. Critics were in almost unanimous
agreement that it was as sharp and witty as
any she had written. Clearly she had all her
faculties right up to her last days. She also
left a diary that revealed, amongst other
things, that she had never done a stroke
of physical exercise in her entire life. She
was fond of joking that if she walked once
round her study, she needed to sit down
for a rest. So, if a long and productive life
is what you want, you should forget about
jogging or joining a gym. Save your energy.
a How would you name or describe the
fallacy in the above argument?
b Which of the following, if true, helps to
expose the flaw in the reasoning, and so
challenges the argument?
A Women didn’t go to gyms when
Farrah was young.
B Farrah’s grandfather lived to 104, and
her mother to 106.

2.10 Flaws and fallacies

77

C According to her diaries Farrah had
never been seriously ill.
D Few people are still working in their
late nineties.
E Many writers live physically inactive
lives.
3 Would the data in the two graphs below
support the conclusion that computer
games contribute to violence? Give
reasons for your answer.
Levels of reported
assault (Police Dept.)

20%

4 Start a file, or database, of common
reasoning errors by listing the ones you
have met in this. You could use three
headings, or fields:
 ame (or brief description), e.g. Relying
N
on anecdotal evidence
Explanation, e.g. Using a single
occurrence of something and drawing a
general conclusion from it.
Example, e.g. I know someone who fell
through the ice at this spot. Therefore it is
never safe to cross this lake.
	Whenever you encounter flawed or suspect
arguments, add them to the file.

10%

Answers and comments are on page 315.
0%
01/09

01/10

01/11

Sales
Quarterly downloads of
(million units) new computer games
from one online supplier
10
8
6
4
2
2009
General theme

78

2010
Violent theme

Unit 2 Critical thinking: the basics

Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

3.1 What do we mean by
a ‘problem’?

Consider the action of making a cup of instant
coffee. If you analyse the processes you need to
go through, they are quite complicated. Just
the list of items you need is quite long: a cup, a
teaspoon, a jar of coffee, a kettle, water, and
milk and sugar if you take them. Having found
all these items, you fill the kettle and boil it;
use the teaspoon to put coffee into the cup;
pour the boiling water into the cup, just to the
right level; stir; add milk and sugar; then put
all the things you used away again. In fact one
could break this down even more: we didn’t
really go into very great detail on, for example,
how you boil the kettle.
Although this is complicated, it is an
everyday task that you do without thinking.
However, if you encounter something new,
which may be no more complicated, the
processes required to achieve the task may
need considerable thought and planning.
Most of such planning is a matter of
proceeding in a logical manner, but it can also
require mathematical tasks, often very simple,
such as choosing which stamps to put on a
letter. This thought and planning is what
constitutes problem solving.
Solving most problems requires some sort
of strategy – a method of proceeding from the
beginning which may be systematic or may
involve trial and error. This development of
strategies is the heart of problem solving.
Imagine, for example, trying to fit a number
of rectangular packages into a large box. There
are two ways of starting. You can measure the
large box and the small packages, and
calculate the best way of fitting them in. You
may make some initial assumptions about the

best orientation for the packages, which may
turn out later to be wrong. Alternatively, you
may do it by trial and error. If you have some
left over at the end that are the wrong shape to
fit into the spaces left, you may have to start
again with a different arrangement. Either
way, you will have to be systematic and need
some sort of strategy.
With some problems the method of finding
an answer might be quite clear. With others
there may be no systematic method and you
might have to use trial and error from the start.
Some will require a combination of both
methods or can be solved in more than one way.
The words ‘problem solving’ are also used in
a mathematical sense, where the solution
sought is the proof of a proposition. ‘Problemsolving’ as tested in thinking skills
examinations does not ask for formal proofs,
but rather asks for a solution, which may be a
calculated value or a way of doing something.
Although many of the problems we shall look
at here use numbers and require numerical
solutions, the mathematics is usually very
simple – much of it is normally learned in
elementary education. Many problems do not
use numbers at all.
As we saw in Chapter 1.3, there are three
clearly defined processes that we may use
when solving problems:
• identifying which pieces of data are
relevant when faced with a mass of data,
most of which is irrelevant
• combining pieces of information that
may not appear to be related to give new
information

3.1 What do we mean by a ‘problem’?

79

• relating one set of information to another
in a different form – this involves using
experience: relating new problems to ones
we have previously solved.
When solving problems, either in the real
world or in examinations, you are given, or
have, or can find, information in various
forms – text, numbers, graphs or pictures – and
need to use these to come up with a further
piece of information which will be the
solution to the problem.
The processes described above are the
fundamental building blocks of problemsolving and can be expanded into areas of
skill that may be brought together to solve
more complex problems. The chapters in this
unit divide these into smaller identifiable skill
areas which can be tested using multiplechoice questions. Examples of such sub-skills
are searching for solutions and spatial
reasoning (dealing with shapes and patterns).
Later units deal with more complex problems,
which can only be solved using several of
these sub-skills in combination, and are closer
to the sort of problem solving encountered in
the real world.
The activity below gives an example of a
simple problem; you can give either a simple
answer or a more complicated one, depending
on the degree of detail you consider necessary.

Activity
 uke has a meeting in a town 50 miles
L
away at 3 p.m. tomorrow. He is planning
to travel from the town where he lives to
the town where the meeting is by train,
walking to and from the station at both
ends.
List the pieces of information Luke needs in
order to decide what time he must leave home.
Then work out how you would proceed to plan
his journey from these pieces of information.

80

Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

Commentary
The chances are that you missed some vital
things. You may have thought that all he
needed was a railway timetable. Unless you
approached the problem systematically, you
may not have thought of everything.
Let us start by thinking of everything he
does from leaving his house to arriving at the
meeting.
1 He leaves his house.
2 He walks to the station.
3 He buys a train ticket.
4 He goes to the platform.
5 He boards the train when it arrives.
6 He sits on the train until it reaches the
destination.
7 He leaves the train.
8 He walks to where his meeting is being
held.
You can construct the pieces of information
he needs from this list. They are:
1 The time taken to walk from his house
to the station.
2 The time needed to buy a ticket.
(Remember to allow for queues!)
3 The time to walk to the platform.
4 The train timetable.
5 The time taken to walk from the station
to where the meeting is being held.
Did you find them all? Perhaps you thought of
some that I missed. For example, I didn’t think
of allowing for the train being late. You could
estimate this by experience and allow some
extra time.
Now, to find out when he should leave home
we need to work backwards. If his meeting is at
3 p.m., you can work out when he must leave
the destination station to walk to the meeting.
You can then look at the timetable to see what
is the latest train he can catch (allowing extra
for the train to be late if appropriate). Then see
from the timetable when this train leaves his
home town. Continuing, you can determine
when he should have bought his ticket, and
when he should leave home.

Of course, you could do the whole thing by
guesswork, but you might get it all wrong and,
more to the point, you cannot be confident
that you will have got it right.
In the sense we are using the word in this
book, a ‘problem’ means a situation where we
need to find a solution from a set of initial
conditions. In the following chapters we shall
look at different sorts of problem, different
kinds of information, and how we can put
them together to find solutions to the
problems. These chapters will lead you through
the types of problem-solving exercises you will
encounter in thinking skills examinations and
give some indications about how you might

approach such problems. However, learning to
solve problems is a generally useful life skill
and also, we hope, fun!

Summary
• In this chapter we have looked at what a
problem is and how the word can be used
in different ways.
• We have seen how information is used to
contribute to the solution of a problem.
• We have looked at how various methods
of using information can lead to effective
solutions.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Imagine you are going to book tickets for
a concert. List the pieces of information
you need and the processes you need to
go through in order to book the tickets and
get to the concert. In what order should
you do them? First list the main things,
then try to break each down into smaller
parts.
2 Consider something you might want to buy,
such as a car, mobile phone or computer.
Make a list of the pieces of information
you would need in order to make a
decision on which make or model to buy.
3 Find a mileage chart that gives the
distances between various towns (these
can be found in most road atlases or on
the internet). Pick a base town and four
other towns. Consider making a journey
that starts at the base town, takes in the
other four and ends at the base town. In
what order should you visit the towns to
minimise the journey?

4 The following questions are based on a
very simple situation, but require clear
thinking to solve. Some are easier than
others.
	A drawer contains eight blue socks and
eight black socks. It is dark and you
cannot tell the difference between the
two colours.
a What is the smallest number you will
have to take out to ensure that you have
a matching pair?
b What is the largest number you can take
out and still not have a matching pair?
c What is the smallest number you can
take out to be sure that you have one of
each colour?
d What is the largest number you can take
out and still have all of one colour?
e What is the smallest number you can
take out to be sure you have a blue pair?
Answers and comments are on pages 315–16.

3.1 What do we mean by a ‘problem’?

81

3.2 How do we solve problems?
We have seen that a problem consists of a set
of information and a question to answer. In
order to solve the problem we must use the
information in a certain way. The way in
which we use it may be quite straightforward –
it may for example be simply a matter of
searching a table for a piece of data that
matches given conditions. In other cases,
instead of searching for a piece of data, we may
have to search for a method of solution. The
important thing in either case will be to have a
strategy that will lead to the solution.
Many publications give (in various forms)
the procedure:

Data

Process

Solution

This is all well and good, and indeed
represents a way problems can be solved. It
says nothing about what the words and, in
particular, the arrows mean. It is in this detail
that the key to problem solving is found. In
simple terms, we are concerned with
identifying the necessary pieces of data and
finding a suitable process. There are no hard
and fast rules; different problems must be
approached in different ways. This is why
problem solving appears in thinking skills
examinations; it tests the ability of candidates
to look at situations in different ways and to be
able to use many different strategies to find
one that works. Whilst a knowledge of the
different categories of problem, as identified
by the syllabuses and the various chapters of
this unit, will help, you will always need to
have an open mind and be prepared to try
different approaches.
There are several ways problems may be
approached. A term that is used a lot is
‘heuristic’ (see for example How to Solve It

82

Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

by G. Polya [Penguin, 1990] – a book on
mathematical problem solving). This word
comes from the Greek ‘to find’ and refers to
what we might call ‘trial and error’ methods.
Alternative methods depend on being
systematic: for example, an exhaustive search
may lead to an answer. Previous experience of
solving similar types of questions will always
be a help.
Imagine you are going out and can’t find
your house keys. Finding them is a problem in
the sense meant by this section of the book.
The heuristic method (and sometimes the
quickest) is to run around all the likely places
to see if they are there. After the likely places,
you start looking at the less likely places, and
so on until they turn up or you have to resort
to more systematic methods. There are two
systematic ways of searching. The first (using
experience) involves thinking carefully about
when you last came into the house and what
you did; this can be the quickest method. The
other (which in mathematical terms is often
known as the ‘brute force’ method) involves
searching every room of the house thoroughly
until they are found. This is often the most
reliable method but can take a very long time
and most people will use it as a last resort.
When people are solving problems, they
may use all of these methods, often in the
order given above. This is quite logical, as the
heuristic method can lead to a very rapid
solution whilst the systematic search is
slowest. One of the prime skills you need in
tackling problem-solving questions in
examinations is to make a good judgement of
which method is the most appropriate one to
use in any set of circumstances.

In any problem you will be presented with
some initial pieces of information – these
may be in the form of words, a table of
numbers, a graph or a picture. You will also
know what you need to produce as a
solution (the answer to a question). The first
thing to do is to identify which pieces of
information are most likely to be useful in
proceeding to the solution and to try to work
out how these pieces of information may be
used. Problem-solving questions often
contain redundant information, i.e. that
which is not necessary to solve the problem.
This echoes real life, where the potential
information is infinite.
The activity below is a relatively easy
example. It is not difficult to find a way of
approaching the problem, and the necessary
calculations are clear and simple. See if you
can do it (or at least work out how you would
tackle it) before looking at the commentary
which follows.

Activity
Julia has been staying in a hotel on a
business trip. When she checks out, the
hotel’s computer isn’t working, so the
receptionist makes a bill by hand from the
receipts, totalling $471. Julia thinks she has
been overcharged, so she checks the
itemised bill carefully.
Room:
Breakfast:
Dinners:
Telephone:
Bar:		
Laundry:

4 nights at $76.00 per night
4 at $10.00 each
3 at $18.00 each
10 units at $1.70 per unit
various drinks totalling $23.00
3 blouses at $5.00 each

It appears that the receptionist miscounted
one of the items when adding up the
total. Which item has Julia been charged
too much for?

Commentary
The sum of the charges on the itemised bill is
$453. This is $18 less than her bill, so she has
been overcharged for one dinner. None of the
other items could come to exactly $18, either
singly or severally.
Although this example is simple, it
illustrates many of the methods used in
solving problems:
• Identify clearly and unambiguously the
solution that is required. Reading the
question carefully and understanding it
are very important.
• Look at the data provided. Identify which
pieces are relevant and which are irrelevant.
• Do you need to make one or more
intermediate calculations before you
can reach the answer? This can define a
strategy for solving the problem.
• You may need to search the given data for
a piece of information that solves (or helps
to solve) the problem.
• Past experience of similar problems helps.
If you had never seen this type of problem
before, you would have had to spend more
time understanding it.
• The above problem was solved using
a systematic procedure (in this case
calculating the correct bill, a value not
given in the original problem).
The activity below, whilst still being relatively
simple, involves a slightly different type of
problem where the method of solution is less
obvious.

Activity
The SuperSave supermarket sells Sudsy
washing up liquid for $1.20 a bottle. At this
price they are charging 50% more than the
price at which they buy the item from the
manufacturers. Next week SuperSave is

3.2 How do we solve problems?

83

having a ‘Buy two get a third free’ offer on
this item. The supermarket does not want to
lose money on this offer, so it expects the
manufacturers to reduce their prices so
SuperSave will make the same actual profit
on every three bottles sold.
By how much will the manufacturers have
to reduce their prices?
A

1

6

   B

1

4

   C

1

3

   D

1

2

   E

2

3

Commentary
This could be solved in a variety of ways. We
could just guess. As we are letting 1 3 of the
bottles go for free, option C, 1 3 , is tempting.
This is wrong.
It could be done by trial and error: for
example, start with the manufacturers
charging 60¢ (this would be option B) and see
what that leads to. For three bottles they will
charge $1.80 and the supermarket sells for
$2.40, so their mark-up is 60¢ for three bottles
or 20¢ each. This is not enough, so the
manufacturers’ price must be lower.
In fact there is a straightforward, systematic
way of solving this which is made clear by
writing down all the relevant values which can
be calculated:
Normally SuperSave sell at $1.20, so they
buy at 80¢ (selling at 50% more than they
buy), so each bottle is sold for 40¢ more than
the price at which it is bought.
Under the offer, they will sell three bottles
for the price of two, i.e. three for $2.40, or 80c
each. If they are still selling for 40¢ more than
the price at which they have to buy, they will
be buying from the manufacturer at 40¢. So,
the manufacturers will have to halve their
price. Option D is correct.
This method was quite quick, and certainly
quicker than the trial and error method. It is
the sort of solution that you are more likely to
come up with if you have seen a lot of similar

84

Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

problems before and you think carefully about
the information given.
Finally, to be sure that you have found the
correct solution, check the answer. The profit
on one bottle was $1.20 − 80¢ = 40¢; the profit
on three bottles under the offer is $2.40 −
$1.20 = $1.20, or 40¢ per bottle. That’s correct!
You should have learned a little about finding
a method of solution from this example. The
guesswork method can only work by luck. This
may be called the ‘pirate’s gold’ approach – we
know the treasure is on the island somewhere so
we dig a hole. If it’s not there, we dig another
one somewhere else. Sometimes this method
may seem to work, but it is usually because a
little previous experience has been used, even
unknowingly. The trial and error method,
sometimes using a common sense strategy
which turns it into a partial search, can be
effective for solving some problems. Other
problems may need an exhaustive search to
solve; these are discussed in Chapter 3.6.
In the case above – and in many others – the
method of finding a clear strategy was the
most efficient. Strategies are not always found
by rigorous methods; the discovery of an
appropriate strategy usually depends on past
experience of similar problems.

Summary
• We have looked at some methods of
solving problems, investigating how
different methods may be used in different
circumstances.
• We have recognised the value of
experience in identifying problem types and
appropriate methods of solution.
• We have seen how important it is to read
and understand the information and the
question.
• We have looked at the relative merits
of guesswork, searching and strategic
methods of solution.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 The petrol usage of a number of cars has
been measured. Each car started with a
full tank, then made a journey (all journeys
were over similar roads). After the journey
the tank was filled to the top, the amount
of petrol needed to fill it being recorded.
The results are shown below. Put the cars
in order of their petrol efficiency (km/litre),
from lowest to highest.
Car

Length of
journey
(km)

Petrol
used
(litres)

Montevideo

120

10

Stella

150

16

Riviera

200

25

Roamer

185

21

Carousel

230

16

2 The votes have recently been cast at the
local elections. Voting is carried out using
the alternative vote system. This means that
each voter ranks the candidates in order of
preference. Votes are counted initially on the
basis of all voters’ number one ranking. The
candidate with the least votes is excluded
and the votes of those people who placed
him or her number one are reallocated using
their second preferences. The process then

continues until a winner is established.
	The results of the first count are shown
below. How many candidates still have a
chance of winning?
Patel		
Brown		
Walsh		
Ndelo		
Macpherson
Gonzalez

323
211
157
83
54
21

3 Rajesh is cooking a meal for some friends.
This will involve roasting a chicken,
which takes 2 hours’ cooking time plus
15 minutes resting on removal from the
oven. The oven takes 15 minutes to
warm up. He will also cook some rice
(30 minutes’ soaking plus 15 minutes’
cooking), broccoli (5 minutes to prepare
and 5 minutes to cook) and a sauce
(10 minutes to prepare and 15 minutes
to cook).
	What should be the timing of events if the
friends are to eat at 7 p.m.?
4 Joseph is making a bookcase. This
requires two vertical side-pieces of wood
1.2 m high and three shelves 1.6 m long.
All are 20 cm wide. He will cut these from
a sheet of wood 2.4 m × 1.2 m.
	Draw a diagram showing how the pieces may
be cut to leave the largest possible uncut
rectangle. Are there other ways to cut it?
Answers and comments are on pages 316–17.

3.2 How do we solve problems?

85

3.3 Selecting and using
information

In one very simple form, problem solving
involves understanding and making use of
information. In the examples considered in
this chapter, the problem to solve is to select
the correct pieces of information and to use
them in an appropriate manner.
Information can come in a great variety of
forms and, if you want to be good at using it,
you will need to practise extracting data from a
range of sources.
Here are some forms that sets of
information can take:
• Tables: these could include summaries of
surveys, specification sheets or transport
timetables.
• Graphs: these are used in science and
business to provide information in such
a way that it can be absorbed quickly and
easily. For example, a graph may show
variables such as temperature over time;
financial data may be shown in bar charts.
• Words: numerical, spatial, logical and
many other types of information can be
summarised or described in words.
• Pictorial: pictures, for example in the form
of engineers’ or architects’ drawings, can
be used not only to show what something
looks like, but also to give information
about relative sizes and positions.
• Diagrammatic: diagrams come in a
wide range of forms: flow charts, maps,
schedules, decision trees and many other
types can summarise numerical and
spatial information.
The following series of activities is based on
various different forms of information. Try to

86

Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

work them out by yourself before looking at
the answers and comments. These activities
also introduce some problem-solving methods
that are discussed further in later chapters.

Activity
Tabular information
The table shows the results of a survey into
participation in three types of regular
exercise taken by people from three
age groups.
Although the row and column totals are
correct, one of the individual figures in the
table has been typed incorrectly. Which is it?
Type of exercise
Age

Gym

Swimming

Jogging

Total

10–15

14

57

32

103

16–20

86

92

45

232

21–25

67

58

44

169

167

207

130

504

Total

Commentary
This table has a lot of figures, and finding the
incorrect one might seem quite daunting.
However, we must look at what we are trying
to do and what information we have.
In this case we know that only one
individual entry is incorrect and that the

totals are correct. All we have to do is check
each total in turn. Looking at the column
totals, we find that the first two (167 and 207)
agree with the entries by adding the three
numbers above them. However, the third one
does not agree with the entries above it, which
add up to 121.
We are not quite there yet; the wrong
number could be any of those in the ‘Jogging’
column. Repeating the procedure for the row
totals, we find that the second row (age 16–20)
adds up to 223. The error must be where the
wrong totals cross over. The incorrect figure is
the ‘45’ in the age 16–20 Jogging entry. It
should be 54; we know it should be 9 higher
because both the row and column totals were
9 too low. A transposition of the digits is a
common error when entering data.

Activity

Average temperature range (ºC)

Graphical information
The graph shows average monthly
temperatures for Bangladesh. The lower end of
the bar shows the average of the lowest daily
temperatures during the month and the top end
of the bar shows the average of the highest
daily temperatures during the month.
40
35
30
25

what the graph means. Then, based on the
question, one must interpret the graph in the
required way.
The solution is quite simple and involves
subtracting the lowest point on any of the
bars from the highest point on any of the
bars. These values are (reading as accurately
as possible) 14° and 34°, so the total range
is 20°.

Activity
Verbal information
In an inter-school hockey knockout
competition, there are initially 32 teams.
Teams are drawn by lots to play each other
and the winner of each match goes through
to the next round. This is repeated until there
are only two teams left, who play each other
in the final, and the winner gets a cup.
Matches have two halves of 20 minutes
each. If the teams are level at the end of
normal play, two extra 10-minute periods are
played. If it is still a draw, teams take penalty
shots at goal to decide the winner.
Chorlton High were eventually knocked out
in the semi-final (without extra time). In one
of the earlier rounds they had to play the two
extra periods before they won.
For how long in total had Chorlton High
played when they were knocked out?

20
15
10

Commentary

5
0

Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

What is the difference between the lowest
average temperature and the highest average
temperature during the year?

Commentary
There are two skills involved here. Firstly one
must understand the verbal description of

There is a considerable mass of information
here, all presented as words. It must be read
carefully. The method of solution is not
difficult; the skill lies in choosing the correct
pieces of information and using them
appropriately. First we need to know how
many matches Chorlton High played. The first
round had 32 teams; subsequent rounds had
16, 8 and 4, which is when they were knocked
out – so they played 4 matches.

3.3 Selecting and using information

87

Next we need to know how long each
match lasted. This is 2 × 20 minutes =
40 minutes. We must also note that Chorlton
High played the two extra periods in one
match − a total of 20 minutes. So their total
playing time was 4 × 40 minutes + 20 minutes
= 180 minutes or 3 hours in total.

Activity
Diagrammatic information
The map is a simple representation of the
only roads joining four towns.
Dagholm
12 km

Activity
Pictorial information
The picture shows a tiled floor where 24
individual tiles with different printing on them
are used to make up the overall pattern.
How many different patterns of tile are
needed to make up the overall pattern?

16 km
14 km
Asten
8 km

12 km
Carlstad
Byburg

I live in Asten and wish to visit a friend in
Carlstad. I normally go via Byburg but have
discovered (before setting off) that the road
between Byburg and Carlstad is blocked by
an accident. How much will this add to my
journey?

Commentary

Commentary
Solving this requires a systematic evaluation of
the picture. We not only need to identify the
apparently different tiles, but also to look at
how tiles can be used in different orientations.
The procedure is to eliminate tiles one by one,
noting each time whether a new tile is needed
or whether one we have already seen can be
used in a different orientation.
In fact, only three tiles are needed:

If you did not get the right answer, can you
now convince yourself that three tiles as
shown is correct?

88

Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

To solve this you need to look at the length of
the normal route and then consider the
alternatives. The journey is normally 8 km +
12 km = 20 km. If I cannot use the road between
Byburg and Carlstad, the only alternative
(shown on the map) is via Dagholm. The
distance will be 12 km + 16 km = 28 km. This is
8 km more than my normal route.

Summary
• In this chapter we have seen how data can
be presented in several different forms.
• We have also seen the importance of
reading the question carefully to ensure
that the correct pieces of data are
extracted from the information given and
used correctly.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Using the data in the first example above
(tabular information, page 86), draw a
graph of an appropriate type showing the
proportion of types of exercise regularly
taken by the 16–20-year-olds in the sample.
2 The pie charts illustrate the change that
the introduction of the CD in 1985 had on
the recorded-music market. Total annual
sales of all types of recording in 1984
were 170 million and in 1994 they were
234 million.

Cassettes
23%

Vinyl
singles
44%

Vinyl
LPs
33%
1984
Vinyl
LPs
2%

Cassettes
24%
Vinyl
singles
26%

CDs
48%

1994

	What, approximately, happened to the
actual annual sales of vinyl singles
between 1984 and 1994?

3 The table below shows the finishing
positions in the Contrey handball league.
The five teams play each other once each.
Three points are awarded for a win and one
for each team in a drawn match.
Team

Points

Alency

8

Bresville

7

Argest

5

Euroland

4

Saint Croix

2

How many of the games were drawn?
4 A carpenter is fitting some bookcases to
an alcove, using as much of the space
as possible from floor to ceiling, a height
of 2.5 m. The books to be fitted into the
shelves are 210 mm high and a gap of
at least 30 mm is necessary above each
book so they can be removed. The shelves
are 20 mm thick. The alcove is 1.2 m
wide. The bottom shelf should not be less
than 300 mm from the ground, as the
house-owner cannot bend down easily.
	How many shelves can be fitted into the
alcove?
Answers and comments are on page 317.

A They fell by 14 million.
B They fell by 5 million.
C They were unchanged.
D They rose by 17 million.
E They rose by 64 million.

3.3 Selecting and using information

89

3.4 Processing data
In the previous chapter we looked at solving
problems by selecting the correct items of data
from various sources and using them in the
correct way to produce a solution. This chapter
considers problems where the required data is
clearly given (i.e. there is no ambiguity about
which pieces of data to use). The problems
covered here involve using the data in the
correct way to find the solution to the
problem. The activity below illustrates this.

Activity
Luiz and Bianca are brother and sister and go
to the same school. Luiz walks to school
using a footpath, a distance of 900 m, and
he walks at 1.5 m/s. Bianca cycles to school
along the roads, a distance of 1.5 km, and
she cycles at 5 m/s. They both plan on
arriving at school by 8.55 a.m. Who leaves
home first and by how much?
A Bianca, by 5 minutes
B Luiz, by 5 minutes
C They leave at the same time
D Bianca, by 10 minutes
E Luiz, by 10 minutes

Commentary
The skill in this question is to use the correct
pieces of information appropriately and at the
right time in the calculation. There are five
relevant pieces of data (the two distances, the
two speeds and the fact that they arrive at the
same time). It is quite clear that the method
of solution is to calculate each of the journey
times, so in this case there is no method to
find. Problems where the method is not clear
will be discussed in the next chapter.

90

Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

Luiz walks 900 m at 1.5 m/s, so this takes
him 900 ÷ 1.5 = 600 seconds or 10 minutes.
Bianca cycles 1.5 km (1500 m) at 5 m/s, which
takes her 1500 ÷ 5 = 300 seconds or 5 minutes.
As Luiz takes 5 minutes more, he must leave
home 5 minutes earlier, so B is correct. (If you
are unsure about relating speed, distance and
time, see the advice below.)
This is a multiple-choice question, a type
you will see frequently in thinking skills
examinations. Some of the activities in this
section of the book have multiple-choice
answers, as in the examinations. However,
many have ‘open’ answers, where you are
asked, for example, to give a numerical
solution. This is, in many ways, a better way to
learn how to do the questions – you will be
able to select the correct multiple-choice
answers more easily if you can do the question
without needing to know possible answers. If
you can come to the solution without looking
at the options and then check that your
solution is one of the options, this is safer and
often quicker than checking the options
against the data given. In the case of the
example above, it is much better to work out
the answer first.

Speeds, distances and times
Many problem-solving questions involve
calculating one of the variables speed,
distance or time from the other two. If you
are uncertain how to do this, the formulae
below give the method:
speed = distance/time
distance = speed × time
time = distance/speed

If you are worried about remembering these,
there is an easy way. Speed is measured in
units such as km/h or m/s. This is a
distance divided by a time, which is
equivalent to the first formula – the others
can be worked out from it.
Always check that you use consistent
units in calculations. If the speed is in
metres per second and the time is given in
minutes, you must first convert the time to
seconds (or the speed to metres per
minute) before applying the formula.
Also, consider whether your final answer
is a reasonable number. If, in the example
given above, you had divided Bianca’s
distance in km by the speed in m/s you
would have an answer of 1.5 ÷ 5 = 0.3. A
value of 0.3 seconds or minutes would
clearly be ridiculous for cycling 1.5 km (and
hours did not appear in the calculation) so it
is obvious that something is wrong.
Care must be taken when calculating
average speeds. Say, for example, that a
river ferry travels between two towns 12 km
apart, travelling at 4 km/h upstream and
6 km/h downstream. It might seem that the
average speed will be 5 km/h, but this is
wrong. In order to calculate the average
speed, you must divide the total distance
by the total time. In this case, the ferry
takes 3 hours upstream and 2 hours
downstream – a total of 5 hours. The
average speed is, therefore, 24 ÷ 5 or
4.8 km/h.

Activity
Cheng has a garden pond, which he tops up
at the beginning of each week from a
200-litre water butt, which is, in turn, filled by
rainwater from part of his roof. At the
beginning of the summer both the pond and

the water butt are full. The average weekly
summer rainfall where he lives is 5 mm. The
part of his roof from which he collects rain
has an area of 6 m2. He uses 60 litres per
week on average to top up the pond.
For how many weeks can Cheng expect to
have enough water in the butt to top up the
pond fully?

Commentary
This question has a lot of data presented
verbally. We must identify the important
variables to calculate in order to answer the
question. This is done by working backwards:
we need the number of weeks the water in the
butt will last. This, in turn, depends on the
amount of water in the butt at the start
(already known) and the average loss of water
per week. The average loss of water per week is
the amount collected minus the amount used
(which we also know). Thus, the only
unknown is the amount collected. This is
what we need to calculate first.
The weekly rainfall is 5 mm, which is
collected on an area of 6 m2. In consistent
units (using metres) the volume collected is
6 m2 × 0.005 m of rain or 0.03 cubic metres. A
cubic metre is 1000 litres, so the volume
collected is 30 litres.
As Cheng uses 60 litres per week and
collects 30 litres, he loses a net 30 litres each
week. Thus his 200-litre butt will last for 5
weeks; at the beginning of the sixth he will
have only 50 litres, which is not enough to top
up his pond.
This question illustrates one method of
approaching problem-solving questions. We
know what answer is required, so which pieces
of information do we need to come up with to
get that answer? This indicates which
calculations need to be made on the given
data. It may be represented as shown on the
following page.

3.4 Processing data

91

Answer required

Information required
Calculation

Solution

Data given

Summary
• We have seen that, for some problems,
the important data is given clearly and
unambiguously: the skill in finding the
correct solution is to use the given data in
the correct way.

• We have learned that it can sometimes be
useful to work backwards from the answer
to identify what needs to be calculated.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 A department store is having a sale. The
advertising hoarding for the sale is shown
below:
 0% off if the marked prices
3
total more than $100.
	 If you buy three items, you
get the least expensive free.
	This is a bit ambiguous. I don’t know
whether they give me the free item before
they calculate whether it is over $100, or
after. Suppose I buy three items at marked
prices of $40, $40 and $30. What could I
expect to pay under either interpretation?
2 Sylvia Okumbe is trying to break her
national record of 14 minutes 35 seconds
for running 5000 m (12 1 2 laps of the
track). Her average time per lap for the
first 5 laps is 1 minute 13 seconds. What
average lap time does she need for the
remaining 7 1 2 laps?

92

Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

3 A pancake stall sells sweet pancakes
and savoury pancakes. The savoury
pancakes can have three toppings (eggs,
ham, tomato) which may be used in any
combination. The sweet ones come with
orange, lemon or strawberry jam with
either ice cream or fresh cream. How many
combinations does the stall sell?
4 I am going to change my phone contract.
The monthly contract I am considering
costs $30 per month with 75 minutes of
free calls and 100 free text messages.
Additional calls cost 10¢ per minute and
additional text messages 10¢ each. An
alternative is ‘Pay as you go’ which has no
monthly charge but all calls cost 30¢ per
minute and texts cost 10¢ each.
		 I typically make 100 minutes of calls
and 60 text messages each month. Which
would be the better contract for me and by
how much?
Answers and comments are on page 317.

3.5 Finding methods of solution
The previous chapter dealt with problems for
which the method of solution was relatively
easy to find. In this chapter we are looking at
problems where the primary skill in solving
them is to develop a method of solution. The
way of proceeding to an answer in some
problems may not be clear:
a either because it is necessary to find an
intermediate solution first,
b or because we need to work
simultaneously forward from the data
(to identify what can be calculated) and
backwards from the required answer (to
identify what needs to be calculated).
Having a strategy for approaching such
problems is important. In particular, it can be
very useful if you have seen a problem of a
similar sort before, which you know how to
approach – this is where experience in tackling
problem-solving questions can be invaluable.
Sometimes it may be necessary to try different
ways of approaching the problem; it is
important to realise quickly if your line of
attack is being unsuccessful.
One strategy that can help to solve
problems when you are not clear how to
proceed is to analyse the problem:

• look at the question and decide what
pieces of information could lead to the
answer
• make a sketch, list or table.
Sometimes, intermediate answers are
necessary in order to proceed to the complete
solution. This may be regarded as similar to
the identifying of intermediate conclusions
in Chapter 2.6. The solution of a problem can
be like an argument that first leads to one
conclusion, which then, possibly using
further information, proceeds to the final
conclusion.
This may be illustrated as in the diagram
below. Here, the calculation steps are
represented by the arrows. Not all these
processes are used in all problem solutions.
A problem that may be solved using an
intermediate result is given in the example
on the following page. This is similar to the
question in the previous chapter in that it
involves distances, speeds and times but,
because of the nature of the question, the
method of proceeding is less obvious.

• organise the information you are given
• write down or underline those pieces of
information which you feel are important
• simplify (reject unimportant information)

Answer required

Information required
Intermediate
result
Data

Solution

3.5 Finding methods of solution

93

Activity

Activity

Amy and her brother David live 400 km apart.
They are going to have a week’s holiday by
exchanging houses. On the day they are
starting their holiday, Amy leaves home at
8 a.m. and David at 10 a.m. They both drive
at 120 km/h on a motorway that travels
directly between their homes.
At what time do they pass each other on
the road?

Petra’s electricity supply company charges
her a fixed monthly sum plus a rate per unit
for electricity used. In the most expensive
quarter last year (January to March), she
used 2000 units and her bill was $250.
In the least expensive quarter (July to
September), she used 600 units and her bill
was $138.
She is now adding extra insulation to her
home which is expected to reduce her overall
electricity consumption by 25%. What can
she expect her January to March bill to be
next year (if there are no increases in overall
tariffs)?

Commentary
From the data given, it is easy to find out
when they both arrive at their destinations,
but finding when they cross is not so
straightforward. The problem can be made
much simpler by using an intermediate step.
First calculate where Amy is when David
leaves. She has been travelling for 2 hours, so
she has covered 240 km – that is, she is
160 km from David’s house. The problem is
now quite easy. At 10 a.m. they are 160 km
apart and rushing towards each other at a
joint speed of 240 km/h. Therefore, they will
meet 40 minutes later (160 km/240 km per
hour is 2 3 hour or 40 minutes). The time they
pass each other is 10.40 a.m.
If we had been asked to find the place where
they pass, the passing time could have been
used as a second intermediate value. David
travels 120 km in an hour. 40 minutes
represents 2 3 of this, or 80 km, so they cross
80 km from David’s house.
In this case the numbers were very easy but
the same method of solution could have been
used whatever the distances, times and speeds.
The method of solution, which was not
immediately obvious, became easier by using
the intermediate step.

94

Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

Commentary
This is another problem where an
intermediate calculation is necessary. In order
to calculate Petra’s bill, we need to know the
monthly charge and the rate per unit. We
know the difference between the two quarters’
bills - this difference is only due to the
reduced consumption, so 1400 fewer units
saved $112. This means units cost 8¢ each.
The three-monthly fixed charge, therefore, is:
$250 − 2000 × 8¢ = $250 − $160
= $90 (or $30 per month)
If Petra reduced her January to March
consumption by 25%, this would then be 1500
units, so her bill would be:
$90 quarterly charge plus 1500 × 8¢
= $90 + $120 = $210
In fact, the quarterly charge does not have to
be calculated, only the unit rate. The entire
process of solving this problem could be
speeded up by simply recognising that the
relevant three-month bill would be reduced by
500 × 8¢ or $40.

Another way of approaching problems is to
lay out the information in a different way. This
is especially so when the information is given
verbally – and therefore the connection
between the different pieces may not be
immediately obvious. Consider, for example,
the following problem:

Activity
In a group of 45 students at a school, all
students must study at least one science.
Physics is compulsory, but students may also
opt to study chemistry or biology or both. 9
students take all three sciences. 24 take
both physics and biology (with or without
chemistry). 12 students take only physics.
How many are studying chemistry and
physics but not biology?

Commentary
With a bit of clear thinking, this may be solved
in a direct fashion by making an intermediate
calculation (those not studying biology). Since
all students take physics, the situation is
simplified. 24 study biology and there are 45
in total, so 21 do not study biology. These 21
comprise those studying physics alone and
those studying both physics and chemistry.
However, we know that 12 take only physics,
so 9 must take physics and chemistry but not
biology.
Although this appeared to be an easy
calculation, the method of approach was not
obvious. The situation can be made a lot
easier by using a Venn diagram:
Physics
12

Chemistry
?

In this diagram, the outer box represents all
the students (the universal set); in this case
they all take physics. The left-hand circle
represents those taking chemistry (and
physics) and the right-hand circle represents
those taking biology (and physics).
We know that the number taking only
physics is 12; this is represented by the area
outside both circles. Those taking all three
sciences are represented by the intersection
of the two circles and shown as 9. The
number taking both physics and biology is
24; of these 9 take all three, so 15 take only
physics and biology. This is shown by the
outer section of the right-hand circle. We can
now calculate the number in the area marked
by the question mark, as this must be all the
students in the class minus the numbers in
the other three areas, i.e. 45 − 12 − 9 − 15 = 9.
This is the required answer: the number
studying chemistry and physics but not
biology is 9.
Interestingly, the number studying all three
was not used in the original calculation. It is,
in fact, not needed to solve the problem. We
used it in the Venn diagram solution so we
could calculate the numbers in all the areas on
the diagram.
Graphs, pictures and diagrams can often be
useful in solving problems as they help to
clarify the situation and represent the
numbers used in a more digestible manner.
This is covered in more depth in Chapter 6.2.
The activity above shows that problems can
often be solved in more than one way. It is
important to keep the mind open to
alternatives and not always to pursue a
method which is not apparently leading to a
solution.

Biology
9

15

3.5 Finding methods of solution

95

Activity
There is one railway on the island of Mornia,
which runs from Enderby to Widmouth. There
are two intermediate stops at Maintown and
Riverford. The trains run continuously from
one end to the other at a constant speed,
stopping for three minutes at each station.
From departing Enderby to arriving at
Widmouth takes 42 minutes. From Enderby to
Riverford takes 24 minutes. From Maintown
to Widmouth takes 36 minutes.
How long does it take from Maintown to
Riverford?

Commentary
A diagram makes this problem much easier to
solve.
42 min
E

M
24 min

R

W

36 min

It can now be seen that if we add the time from
E to R to the time from M to W, we get the time
from E to W plus the time from M to R. The
times from E to R and M to W each include one
3-minute stop, whilst the time from E to W
includes two 3-minute stops, so when we
subtract the EW time from the sum of the ER
and MW times, the stops cancel out. Thus the
time from M to R is 24 + 36 − 42 = 18 minutes.
We can now look further at an extra useful
element in the solution of problem-solving

96

Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

questions – that is, checking that we have the
right answer.
If ER takes 24 minutes (including a
3-minute stop) and MR takes 18 minutes (no
stop), then EM (no stop) must take 3 minutes
(24 − 18 − 3). Similarly, RW must take 36 − 18
− 3 = 15 minutes. We now have the times for
all the sections:
EM = 3 minutes
Stop at M = 3 minutes
MR = 18 minutes
Stop at R = 3 minutes
RW = 15 minutes
The total of all these is 3 + 3 + 18 + 3 + 15
= 42 minutes as expected.
Check that the times from E to R and M to
W agree with the answer of 18 minutes from M
to R as given.
This example once again shows that
representing the data in a different way can
lead to a simple method of solving a problem
that at first appears unclear.

Summary
• We have learned the importance of finding
methods of solution for problems for which
the way of proceeding to an answer is not
necessarily obvious.
• We have found that looking for
intermediate results may help to lead to
the final answer.
• We also looked at the value of alternative
ways of presenting data and considering
more than one way of solving problems.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Aruna’s neck chain has broken into two
parts. She has lost the broken link and
is having it repaired by a jeweller who will
open one of the remaining links and use it
to rejoin the chain. The chain is made from
metal 2 mm thick and each of the broken
pieces has a fitting at the end used for
closing the chain which each adds 1 cm to
the total length.

	
	One of the broken pieces is 34.2 cm long
and has 10 more links than the other,
which is 26.2 cm long. Excluding the
fittings at the ends, how many links will
there be in the complete chain?
2 T he distance from Los Angeles to Mumbai
is 14,000 km. Flights take 22 hours,
whilst the return flight from Mumbai to
Los Angeles takes only 17 hours because
of the direction of the prevailing wind.
Assuming the aeroplane would fly the
same speed in both directions in still air,
what is the average wind velocity?

3 From my holiday cottage by the sea I can
see two lighthouses. The southern flashes
regularly every 11 seconds. The northern
lighthouse, after its first flash, flashes
again after 3 and 7 seconds. The whole
cycle repeats every 17 seconds.
		 They have just flashed at exactly the
same time, the northern one having just
started the cycle described above.
		 When will they both flash again at
exactly the same time?
4 The 23 members of a reception class in a
school have done a survey of which cuddly
toys they own. Pandas and dogs are the
most popular, but 5 children have neither
a panda nor a dog. 12 have a panda and
13 have a dog. How many have both a dog
and a panda?
Answers and comments are on pages 317–18.

3.5 Finding methods of solution

97

3.6 Solving problems by searching
Some problems may not always be resolved by
using direct methods of calculation.
Sometimes, problems do not have a single
solution, but many, and we need to find one
that represents a maximum or minimum (for
example the least cost or shortest time for a
journey). In these cases we need to have a
systematic method of evaluating the data to
come up with all (or at least the most likely)
possibilities. This is called a ‘search’. Once
again, with this type of question, it is
important to have a way of checking that the
final answer is correct.
Here is an example of a problem that
requires a search.

Activity
Amir is helping with a charity collection and
has gathered envelopes containing coins
from a number of donors. He notes that all
the envelopes contain exactly three items but
some of them contain one, two or three
buttons instead of coins. All the coins have
denominations of 1¢, 5¢, 10¢, 25¢ or 50¢.
What is the smallest amount of money
that is not possible in one of the envelopes?

Commentary
The easiest way to approach this question is to
list the possibilities in a systematic order. We
know envelopes can contain 0, 1, 2 or 3 coins.
The possibilities with one coin (and two
buttons) are: 1¢, 5¢, 10¢, 25¢ or 50¢.
That was the easy part. With two coins (and
one button), we need to be a little more
careful. First consider that the first coin is 1¢,
then look at all the possibilities for the second.

98

Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

We can then continue with the first coin as a
5¢ in the same manner (we do not need to
consider repeats). The possibilities are:
 ¢ + 1¢, 1¢ + 5¢, 1¢ + 10¢, 1¢ + 25¢, 1¢ +
1
50¢, then
5¢ + 5¢, 5¢ + 10¢, 5¢ + 25¢, 5¢ + 50¢,
10¢ + 10¢, 10¢ + 25¢, 10¢ + 50¢,
25¢ + 25¢, 25¢ + 50¢, and
50¢ + 50¢.
Listing all the totals, we have: 2¢, 6¢, 11¢, 26¢,
51¢, 10¢, 15¢, 30¢, 55¢, 20¢, 35¢, 60¢, 50¢,
75¢ and $1.
Finally, we need to list all the possibilities
with three coins. This is slightly more difficult.
However, we only need to go on until we have
found an impossible amount (you may already
have spotted it). The possibilities are:
1¢ + 1¢ + 1¢, 1¢ + 1¢ + 5¢ etc.
1¢ + 5¢ + 5¢ etc.
You should have spotted by now that we have
not seen the value 4¢ and that all further sums
of three coins (anything including a 5¢ or above)
will be more than 4¢. So 4¢ is the answer.
This was actually a trivial example used for
the purposes of illustration. There is an
alternative way to solve this, which also
involves a search. This is to look at 1¢, 2¢, 3¢,
etc. and see whether we can make the amount
up from one, two or three coins. In this case it
would have led to a very fast solution, but if
the first impossible value had been, for
example, 41¢, this second method would have
taken a very long time and we might have
been unsure that we checked every possible
sum carefully.
The method described above is called an
‘exhaustive search’, where every possible

combination is considered. The alternative
given in the above paragraph may be called a
‘directed search’ where we are looking
selectively for a solution and will give up the
search once we have found one. In the case
above, where we were looking for a minimum,
we can reasonably start searching from the
lowest value up.
A third alternative may be described as a
‘selective search’. In this case we are using a
partial analysis of the problem to reduce the
size of the search, concentrate on certain
areas, or to reject unlikely areas. The activity
below illustrates this.

Activity
Try repeating this exercise using coins of
denominations 1¢, 2¢, 5¢, 10¢, 20¢ and
50¢ and with 1 to 4 coins in each envelope.
This is quite a long search. Consider (and
discuss with others) whether there are ways
of shortening it.

method involves analysing the problem,
which can be a very useful tool in reducing the
size of searches.
The type of search shown above involves
combining items in a systematic manner.
Other searches can involve route maps –
looking for the route that takes the shortest
time or covers the shortest distance, or
tables – for example finding the least
expensive way of posting a number of parcels.
With all these searches, the important
thing is to be systematic in carrying out the
search so that no possibilities are missed and
the method leads to the goal. The activity
below involves finding the shortest route for a
journey.

Activity
The map shows the roads between four
towns with distances in km.
I work in Picton and have to deliver
groceries to the other three towns in any
order, finally returning to Picton. What is the
minimum distance I have to drive?

Commentary
If you start this search you will find it takes a
very long time. It is difficult to be absolutely
systematic (especially when considering all
options for four coins). It is also difficult to
keep track of all values that have been covered
at any point in the search. It is necessary to
look for short-cuts, and out of boredom you
will probably have done so.
The denominations 1¢, 2¢ and 5¢ in
combinations of 1 to 3 coins can make all the
values from 1¢ to 10¢. This means that, by
adding to the 10¢ and 20¢ coins, all amounts
from 1¢ to 30¢ can be made. After 30¢ it is
necessary to use both the 10¢ and 20¢ or a 20¢
and 2 × 5¢. The former leaves one or two extra
coins, which can make 1¢, 2¢, 3¢, 4¢, 5¢, 6¢,
7¢ but not 8¢. The latter leaves only 1 coin,
which cannot be 8¢, so 38¢ is the minimum
that cannot be made from 1 to 4 coins. This

14
Picton

Queenstown
Roseford
10

12
22

8
18
5

Southland

Commentary
There are only a small number of possible
routes. If these are laid out systematically and
the sums calculated correctly, the problem
can be solved quite quickly.
The possible routes (with no repeated visits
to any towns – you should be able to satisfy

3.6 Solving problems by searching

99

yourself that it is never worth retracing your
steps) are:
PQRSP
PQSRP
PRQSP
PRSQP
PSRQP
PSQRP
This gives six values. In order to see how they
are obtained you may note that there are three
pairs, each pair visiting a different one of the
towns first (after leaving Picton). The two
routes in each pair take the last two towns in
opposite orders.
The distances associated with each route
are as follows:
59 km
62 km
67 km
62 km
59 km
67 km

Therefore, the minimum distance is 59 km.
If you were particularly astute, you
would have noticed that the routes come in
three pairs of the same distance (e.g. PQRSP
is the reverse of PSRQP so must be the same).
This would have saved you half the
calculations.

Summary
• We have learned that some problems
require a search to produce a solution.
• We have seen the importance of being
systematic with a search, in order both to
ensure that the correct answer is obtained
and to be certain that we have the right
answer.
• We also saw that searches do not always
have to be exhaustive and how analysis
of the problem can reduce the size of the
search and time taken.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 The notice below shows admission prices
to the Tooney Tracks theme park.
Adult
Child (aged 4–16)
Child (aged under 4)
Senior citizen

$12

$10

Family ticket (for 1 adult and 2
children)

$20

Additional child 4–16 or senior
citizen

$5

Additional adult

$10

$6
Free
$8

Family ticket (for 2 adults and
2 children)

$30

Additional child 4–16 or senior
citizen

$5

100 Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

Additional adult

	Maria is taking her three children aged
3, 7 and 10 and two friends of the older
children (of the same ages) as well as her
mother, who is a pensioner. What is the
least it will cost them?

2 I recently received a catalogue from a book
club. I want to order seven books from
their list. However, I noticed that their price
structure for postage was very strange:
Number of
items

Cost of post
and packing

		 If 5¢ and 20¢ coins are the same
thickness, how many different heights of
$1 pile could she have?
A 5 B 6 C 10 D 11 E 20
4 In a community centre quiz evening, teams
were awarded five points for a correct
answer, no points for no answer, and minus
two points for an incorrect answer. The
teams marked their own score sheets. I
arrived late and the scores after seven
questions were shown on the board as
follows:

1

45¢

2

65¢

3

90¢

4

$1.20

Happy Hunters

28

5

$1.50

Ignorant Idlers

18

6 or more

$3.20

Jumping Jacks

16

Kool Kats

12

Lazy Lurkers

-1

	I decide, on the basis of this, that I will ask
them to pack my order in the number of
parcels that will attract the lowest post and
packing charge. How much will I have to pay?
3 Jasmine has been saving all year for her
brother’s birthday. She has collected all
the 5¢ and 20¢ coins she had from her
change in her piggy bank. She is now
counting the money by putting it into piles,
all containing $1 worth of coins. She
notices that she has a number of piles of
different heights.

a One team was clearly not even clever
enough to calculate their score correctly.
Which one was it?
b Are there any scores, other than those
shown above, that would have raised
suspicion?
Answers and comments are on pages 318–19.

3.6 Solving problems by searching 101

3.7 Recognising patterns
In Chapter 3.1 we saw that there are three
main skills involved in solving problems. We
have already dealt with the first two of these
(identifying important information and
combining pieces of information). This
chapter deals with the third skill, that of
identifying pieces or sets of information in
different forms which are equivalent. In
particular, this chapter deals with graphical,
verbal and tabular information.

An extension of this skill is to identify
possible reasons for variation in data – once
again, this springs from past experience as to
what causes changes and the types of
variation that may be expected. This type of
question is dealt with in more detail in
Chapter 3.8.
These are best illustrated using examples.
The first deals with identifying the similarity
between two sets of data.

Activity
Which of the bar charts accurately
represents the data shown below?

The table shows the results of a survey into
ownership of various household appliances
by families who live in a town.
Appliance

Dishwasher

Vacuum
cleaner

Washing
machine

Microwave
oven

Food processor

Toaster

% ownership

68

98

77

54

34

92

50
0

102 Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

50
0

Toaster
Food processor
Microwave oven
Washing machine
Vacuum cleaner
Dishwasher

% ownership
E

100

% ownership

% ownership

D

0

Vacuum cleaner
Toaster
Washing machine
Dishwasher
Microwave oven
Food processor

0

50

100

100
50
0

Vacuum cleaner
Toaster
Washing machine
Dishwasher
Microwave oven
Food processor

% ownership

50

C

100

Dishwasher
Vacuum cleaner
Washing machine
Microwave oven
Food processor
Toaster

B

100

Vacuum cleaner
Toaster
Washing machine
Dishwasher
Microwave oven
Food processor

% ownership

A

Commentary
This question is actually quite easy. It is only a
matter of being careful and matching
appliance to bar length correctly. The main
complication (and this is a potential trap for
those who don’t look at the question and the
graphs carefully) is that the order of the
appliances in the graphs is different in some
cases from the order in the table. Also, the
exact heights of the bars cannot always be read
accurately enough at the scale on which the
graphs are drawn, so it is necessary to look at
the relative heights of the different bars.
In fact D is the correct graph. The appliances
have been put into order by their percentage
ownership. A has the appliances ordered as for
D but the bars are in the order of the table. The
other graphs have similar errors – you might
like to identify the error in each case.

Activity
This activity reverses the skill shown above:
the graph is given (a pie chart in this case)
and the cost structure it represents has to be
identified.
A student is drawing pie charts to show
how the various elements of the cost of fuel
contribute to the total price in various
countries. The data she is using is shown
below, with the prices in local currencies.
Sudaria Idani

Anguda Boralia

Crude oil

0.70

18.68

0.40

0.50

Refining

0.02

4.67

0.02

0.02

Wholesale

0.09

3.63

0.05

0.14

Retail

0.06

2.08

0.06

0.05

Tax

0.50

22.84

0.80

0.34

Total

1.37

51.90

1.33

1.05

She drew one pie chart last night, but has
not labelled the segments and cannot
remember which country it represents. The
pie chart is shown below.

Which country is it?

Commentary
The data expressed in local currency is not very
useful for a direct comparison. It is easier if the
costs are all expressed as percentages so that
the appropriate components can be compared.
The table is repeated below with the costs as
percentages of the totals for each country.
Sudaria Idani
Crude oil

Anguda Boralia

51.09

36.00

30.10

47.62

Refining

1.46

9.00

1.50

1.90

Wholesale

6.57

7.00

3.76

13.33

Retail

4.38

4.00

4.36

4.76

36.50

44.00

60.27

32.38

Tax

In the pie chart, the largest segment is just
under half the area. It could, therefore, only be
tax in Idani or crude oil in Boralia. We cannot
easily distinguish which as the difference in
the second-largest segments is not very great.
We must, therefore, look at the smallest three
segments. Boralia has one (wholesale) three
times the size of either of the other two, but in
the pie chart they are much closer than this,
so the answer must be Idani.

3.7 Recognising patterns 103

This could, in fact, have been solved without
going to percentages by looking at the relative
sizes of the components in the table for each
country. It would have been quicker to do this,
but would have taken more mental arithmetic.

Activity
The table shows the results of a questionnaire,
asking the five colleges in a town the proportion
of students taking 1–4 A Level subjects.
Percentage of students taking
number of A Levels shown
College

1

2

3

4

Abbey Road

13

25

42

20

Barnfield

5

18

55

22

Colegate

24

36

28

12

Danbridge

16

18

61

5

Eden House

10

14

48

28

Percentage of students

The local newspaper (forgetting that there might
be different total numbers of students in the
five colleges) just added the numbers together
and divided by five to produce a percentage
graph for the town as a whole. However, they
forgot to add in the data for one college so their
percentages did not add up to 100.
30

Commentary
This question is a little more difficult than
some we have seen so far. There are several
ways to approach it. We can note that if we
knew the actual averages for the four colleges
the newspaper did include, it might be possible
to see if these averages disagreed with an
estimated average for the five colleges, and the
direction of the error would give some
indication of which one was forgotten.
Looking at the ‘averages’, the approximate
values (we have to estimate these from the
graph) are 9, 19, 35 and 16 respectively for 1, 2,
3 and 4 A Levels. Multiplying these by 5 4 (to
correct for the fact that they were divided by 5
instead of being divided by 4), we get
(approximately): 11, 24, 44 and 20.
If we were being very systematic, we could
now compare these with all sets of four
averages, but it would take a long time.
Instead, let us note that the 11 looks a little low
for the average of 1 A Level, as does 24 for the
average of 2. 44 for the average of 3 looks very
low and 20 for the average of 4 looks far too
high. From this, we may suspect that
Danbridge has been missed as it is higher than
the others for 3 A Levels and lower for 4.
We can check this by averaging one of the
columns for the other four colleges (preferably
use 3 or 4 A Levels as they look to have the
biggest discrepancy) and comparing the
results – try this for yourself and see whether
you can confirm that Danbridge is the college
whose results are missing.

Summary

20
10
0

1

2

3

4

Number of A Levels

Which one did they forget?

104 Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

• We have learned how data may be
represented in more than one way and the
importance of systematic comparisons
between two sets of data in ascertaining
that they are the same.
• We saw that reading graphs and tables
carefully is necessary in order not to make
errors in identifying similarities.

End-of-chapter assignments

	
A 3221   B 5060   C 1141  
D 2121   E 1290
3 Four house teams play each other in a
school basketball league. The scoring
system gives three points for a win, one for
a draw and none for losing.
		 They all play each other once, and
the league table before the last round of
matches is as follows:
Played Won Drawn Lost Points
Britons

2

0

2

0

2

Danes

2

1

1

0

4

Normans

2

1

0

1

3

Saxons

2

0

1

1

1

played? (Hint: you first need to decide
which games have already been played, so
you know what is left.)
A

B

C

D

E

Britons

5

3

5

5

2

Danes

5

4

7

5

5

Normans

3

4

3

4

6

Saxons

2

4

1

1

2

4 The graph shows the charges made by
a printing company for making various
numbers of posters.
250
Total cost ($)

1 Look in newspapers (business pages are
often useful) or on the internet to find
examples of numerical data in various forms
(verbal, graphical, tabular). Express the data
in a different form. Consider which form
makes the data clearest to understand.
2 Four-digit personal identification numbers
(PINs) are used to withdraw cash from
banks’ machines using plastic cards. It
can be very difficult to remember your
personal number. I have a method of
remembering mine. It is the two numbers
of my birth date (i.e. the date in the month)
reversed, followed by the two digits of my
month of birth reversed (using a zero in
front if either is a single number so, for
example, May would be 05).
		 Which of the following could not be
my PIN?

200
150
100
50
0

1

2

3
4
5
6
Number of posters

7

	Which of the following pricing structures
would give the graph shown?
A $30 per poster
B $50 set-up charge + $20 per poster
C $40 per poster for the first four, any
extra $20 each
D $30 set-up charge, $30 per poster
for the first four, any extra $20 each
	Draw the graphs for the other price
structures.
Answers and comments are on page 319.

	Which of the following points columns are
possible after the last two matches are

3.7 Recognising patterns 105

3.8 Hypotheses, reasons,

explanations and inference

In the introductory chapters we saw that
problems involving making inferences from
data or suggesting reasons for the nature of
variations in the data may appear in either the
critical thinking or the problem-solving
sections of thinking skills examinations.
Such examples are usually based on
quantitative (numerical or graphical) data and
may arise from such areas as finance or
science. They require analysis of the data given
in order to reach some conclusions that may
be drawn from the data or to suggest reasons
for the nature of the data.
The example below is based on a scientific
scenario. While this requires a little
understanding of basic scientific concepts,
most of the skills involved in coming to a
solution depend on clear, logical thinking.

Which of the following explanations are
consistent with the shape of the curve?
(Identify as many as apply.)
A Yeast cells divide when they have
grown enough, so grow exponentially
if they have enough nutrient.
B The rate of increase of yeast cells
depends only on the amount of
nutrient.
C Eventually, the growth of yeast cells is
limited by lack of nutrient.
D Yeast cells die when there is
insufficient nutrient.
E The shape of the curve is explained by
a linear growth in yeast and a linear
decrease in nutrient.

Commentary

Activity

Looking at the statements in turn:

Yeast
concentration

The graph shows the results of an experiment
to determine the growth of a culture of yeast
in a nutrient medium. The liquid containing
the nutrient was made up and a small amount
of yeast introduced. At regular intervals
afterwards, the solution was stirred, a small
sample taken and the concentration of yeast
measured. The graph represents a smooth
line drawn through the results.

Time

106 Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

A This statement explains the initial
increase in growth rate – the increase
looks exponential (increasing in size at a
constantly growing rate).
B This statement would not explain the
initial growth – it would start at a higher
growth rate, which would then decrease
all the time.
C This statement would explain the drop to
zero growth after a time, linked to a lack
of nutrient.
D There is no indication of death; in that
case the population would fall.
E If both processes were linear (resulting in
straight-line graphs), a combination of
them would also result in a straight-line
graph.

So A and C are the explanations for the shape
of the curve.
The activity below is firmly in the
Cambridge Thinking Skills syllabus category of
‘suggesting hypotheses for variations’. You are
given a scenario incorporating numerical data,
and asked which, of a number of possible
situations, could explain the nature of the data.

Activity
Nikul runs exercise classes at his local gym,
and gets there each day by train and bus.
Classes start at different times each day, but
always either on the hour or at half past the
hour. He always gets to the railway station
45 minutes before he is due to start teaching
and the train journey takes 20 minutes, after
which he takes a bus to the gym, which takes
10 minutes. Trains leave every 20 minutes,
starting on the hour. Some days Nikul finds
that he gets to work 5 minutes early. On all
the other days he finds that he gets there
5 minutes late.
Which one of the following could explain
the times that Nikul arrives at the gym?
A The buses leave at 5 and 35 past
each hour.
B The buses leave at 15 and 45 past
each hour.
C The buses leave at 25 and 55 past
each hour.
D The buses leave at 5, 25 and 45 past
each hour.
E The buses leave at 15, 35 and 55 past
each hour.

Commentary
Nikul arrives at the station at either 15 or 45
past the hour. Therefore, he takes the train
either on the hour or at 20 past the hour. He
gets to the bus stop at 20 or 40 past the hour.
Buses at 5, 25 and 45 past the hour would
therefore fit the requirements:
• H
 e would get the bus at 25 past the hour
if he arrived at 20 past. This would mean
that he arrived at work 5 minutes late.
• He would get the bus at 45 past the hour
if he arrived at 40 past. This would mean
that he arrived at work 5 minutes early.
• He would never use the bus at 5 past the
hour, so it doesn’t matter that this one
doesn’t fit the arrival times.
The correct answer is D. It is also illustrative to
see why the wrong answers do not work:
A Buses at 5 and 35 past the hour would
always get Nikul to work on a quarter hour
which could not be 5 minutes early
or late.
B Buses at 15 and 45 past the hour would
mean that Nikul was always 5 minutes
early.
C Buses at 25 and 55 past the hour would
mean that Nikul was always 5 minutes late.
E Because Nikul arrives on the train at 20 or
40 past the hour, he would be getting the
35 or 55 past the hour bus. The bus at 35
past the hour would get Nikul to work at
15 or 45 past the hour which is neither 5
minutes early nor 5 minutes late.
Longer questions at A Level can involve
analysing quite complex data and determining
what conclusions may be drawn from it. The
activity below is of this type. It looks at
identifying reasons for variations in data.

3.8 Hypotheses, reasons, explanations and inference 107

Activity

Wembling in ation as a percentage
of Danotian in ation

The graph shows the inflation rate in the
province of Wembling as a percentage of
inflation in the country of Danotia as a whole
over the period from 2006 to 2012.
100
90
80
70
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

Which of the following is the most plausible
explanation for the variations shown in the
graph?
A Danotian inflation has been high over
the period shown.
B Danotian inflation has risen over the
period shown.
C Food prices in Wembling have risen
less than in Danotia as a whole.
D Food prices in Wembling are subject to
higher seasonal fluctuations than in
Danotia as a whole.
E The inflation rate in Wembling is falling
due to high unemployment.

Commentary
Again we will look at these five answers in
turn. It is important to remember that the
graph represents the inflation in Wembling as
a percentage of the inflation in Danotia, not
the actual inflation rate in Wembling.
A The graph represents only the ratio
between Wembling and the whole of
Danotia; high inflation in Danotia cannot
explain the shape of a graph of the ratio.

108 Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

B A rise in Danotian inflation would only
cause the fall in the ratio shown if the rise
in inflation in Wembling was smaller or
negative: we know nothing about this.
C If food prices rose less in Wembling than
in Danotia as a whole, this could explain
why the ratio fell – even if inflation in
Wembling was rising.
D Seasonal fluctuations would only manifest
themselves within a year, not between
years.
E Even if the inflation rate in Wembling is
falling, we know nothing about the inflation
rate in the whole of Danotia, so we cannot
conclude that the ratio would fall.
Thus C is the only reasonable answer. The
others depend either on reading the graph
incorrectly or reading more into the graph
than we can safely conclude. This illustrates
the importance of reading and understanding
the information given (both verbal and in
other forms) and of reading the question
correctly. Beyond that, the deductions that
can be made follow from the application of
correct logic.
As in the previous chapter, solving these
two types of problem also depends on the
skill of recognising an identity between data
presented in two forms. As with the other
skills described here, this comes with practice
and it can be useful to look at data in
newspapers to see how they are presented
and to consider whether they are always
presented in the clearest way.
The next activity uses logic based more on
manipulating numbers. In this regard, it has
elements of the ‘finding methods of solution’
skill from Chapter 3.5. However, the nature of
the question places it closer to the ‘suggesting
hypotheses for variations’ category of questions.

Activity
(Harder task) A tram company runs a service
along the seafront from Whitesea to Greylake.
Trams leave Whitesea at regular intervals,
starting from 9 a.m., taking one hour to reach
Greylake. They then turn around and start
back 10 minutes after arriving. A driver in the
middle of the day, in his journey from Whitesea
to Greylake, always sees six trams travelling in
the opposite direction. Some of these will
have set off from Greylake before he left, and
some will have set off after he left.
Which of the following must be true? There
may be more than one. If any of the
statements are not true, can you correct
them?
A It takes six trams to run the service.
B The trams run every ten minutes.
C If I sit on the seafront from 11.15 a.m.
to 12.15 p.m., I will see six trams
going past.

Commentary
We can test the statements by making a
timetable. However, to do this, we need to make
an assumption about the departure intervals. It
is, in fact, better to carry out a little analysis first.
When a tram driver leaves Whitesea, all
those trams which left Greylake up to one
hour earlier will already be on their journey.
During the hour it takes him to travel to
Greylake, more trams will be leaving Greylake.
So, in total, he will see all those trams which
left up to an hour before he left, and also all
those which leave up to an hour after he left.
This means the six trams he sees must have left
Greylake in a two-hour period. As they leave at
regular intervals, one must leave every
20 minutes, so B is incorrect.
This may be illustrated by looking at some
actual times. If trams leave every 20 minutes,

they leave Whitesea at 9.00 a.m., 9.20 a.m.,
9.40 a.m., etc. They then leave Greylake 1 hour
10 minutes later, at 10.10 a.m., 10.30 a.m.,
10.50 a.m., etc. A driver leaving Whitesea, for
example, at 11.20 a.m. will see the trams which
left Greylake at 10.30 a.m., 10.50 a.m.,
11.10 a.m., 11.30 a.m., 11.50 a.m. and
12.10 p.m. – six in total.
Looking at statement A, the first tram
leaving Whitesea at 9.00 a.m. reaches Greylake
at 10.00, leaves at 10.10 and returns to
Whitesea at 11.10, in time to become the 11.20
service. In the meantime, other trams will
have left at 9.20, 9.40, 10.00, 10.20, 10.40 and
11.00, i.e. six more, so there must be seven
trams to run the service. A is incorrect.
Looking at statement C, if I sit near the
midpoint from 11.15 a.m. to 12.15 p.m., I will see
the 11.00, 11.20 and 11.40 trams going one way
and the 10.50, 11.10 and 11.30 trams going the
other way, so I will see six in total. C is correct.
Can you confirm these answers by
constructing a timetable?
This kind of problem will be revisited in
Chapter 6.2 where we look at graphical
solutions to problems.

Summary
• We have encountered examples where we
are required to suggest a hypothesis or a
reason for the nature of variation in data.
• The terms hypothesis, reason, explanation
and inference are used in exactly the
same way in problem solving as in critical
thinking, the only difference being that the
information given is in the form of data
rather than verbal description.
• We have seen that extended examples
where more data is supplied can require
analysis that may lead to a range of
conclusions.

3.8 Hypotheses, reasons, explanations and inference 109

End-of-chapter assignments
1 In order to treat a particular disease
effectively, patients are initially given two
drugs. Drug A alone has the effect shown
on the graph below. (10 = total relief from
symptoms. 1 = no relief.)
Average e ectiveness

10

Drug A

1
Time

Average e ectiveness

	The effect of drug B showing how it varies
with time is shown in the graph below (on
the same effectiveness and time scales).
10

Drug B

1

Time

	The reason the patients are given two
drugs is that drug A, whilst being very
effective, has long-term harmful side
effects. Drug B takes some time to
become effective, and has a lower eventual
effect but can be taken indefinitely. The
regime used by doctors is to give both
drugs starting at the same time, then to
withdraw A at a uniform steady rate until,

110 Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

at half the time shown in the graphs,
patients have stopped taking it.
		 Assuming that the effects of the
two drugs are independent, what would
be the expected shape of the graph of
effectiveness for a patient on the regime
described?
2 A
 t a local school, 70% of the students
studied French and 45% studied German.
Which of the following can be confirmed
from the information given?
A All students study either French or
German.
2 of those studying German do not
B 
3
study French.
C 25% of the students study neither
French nor German.
D At least 15% of students study both
French and German.
3 I was shopping at a market in Northern
Bolandia and asked a local how much an
orange was. He said that an orange and a
lemon together cost $2. He then further
confused me by saying that a grapefruit
and a lemon cost $3 and that all three
were different prices.
		 Based on this rather unhelpful
information, which one of the following can
be confirmed?
A An orange costs more than a lemon.
B A lemon costs more than a
grapefruit.
C A grapefruit costs more than a
dollar.
D An orange costs less than a dollar.

4 The Fitland health centre swimming pool
is open seven days a week. There are
four lifeguards, Liam, Moses, Nadila and
Orla, each working four days a week. None
works four consecutive days and at least
two lifeguards are on duty each day, with
three on duty on Saturday and Sunday.
We know that:
• Liam doesn’t work Monday or Saturday.
• Moses doesn’t work Tuesday, Thursday
or Friday.
• Nadila doesn’t work Wednesday or Friday.
• Orla always works on Thursday.

Which of the following is possible?
A Liam works on Thursday.
B Nadila works on Sunday and
Monday.
C Orla works on Monday and Tuesday.
D Three people work on a Monday.
Answers and comments are on pages 319–21.

3.8 Hypotheses, reasons, explanations and inference 111

3.9 Spatial reasoning
Spatial reasoning involves the use of skills that
are common in the normal lives of people
working in skilled craft areas. Imagine, for
example, the skill used by joiners in cutting roof
joists for an L-shaped building. This is also
necessary for many professionals: the surgeon
needs to be able to visualise the inside of the
body in three dimensions and, of course,
architects use these skills every day of their lives.
Spatial reasoning questions can involve
either two- or three-dimensional tasks, or
relating solid objects to flat drawings.
Thinking in three dimensions is not
something that comes easily to all people, but
undoubtedly practice can improve this ability.
In the simplest sense, a problem-solving
question involving spatial reasoning can
require visualising how an object will look
upside down or in reflection. More
complicated questions might involve relating
a three-dimensional drawing of a building to a
view from a particular direction or the
visualisation of how movement will affect the
view of an object. This chapter is shorter in
terms of description than most of the others
but there are more examples at the end; this is
an area where practice is more important than
theory.
The next example involves a problemsolving task in two dimensions.

Approximately what proportion of the two
tiles will be needed to cover the whole floor?

A
B
C
D
E

three white to one black
two white to one black
equal quantities of both
two black to one white
three black to one white

Commentary
This seems a relatively simple problem, but the
answer is not immediately obvious. This is an
example of a tessellation problem. There are
various ways to go about solving it – one way is
to continue drawing the pattern until you have
enough tiles that you can estimate how many
of each are needed. Another, more rigorous,
method is to identify a unit cell that consists of
a number of each tile, which may be repeated
as a block to cover the whole area. Such a unit
cell for this problem is shown in the drawing.

Activity
The drawing shows part of the tiling pattern
used for a large floor area in a village hall.
This is made up of two tiles, one circular
(shown in black) and one irregular six-sided
tile (shown in white).

112 Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

If you now think carefully, you can imagine
that this block of three tiles could be repeated

over and over again, filling any area without
any gaps, to give the pattern shown in the
original drawing. So two white tiles are needed
for every black tile. B is the correct answer.
The activity below involves threedimensional reasoning. Because the drawing is
not of a familiar object, there are no shortcuts; you need to work out what the
possibilities are for the unseen side.

Activity
The drawing is a three-dimensional
representation of a puzzle piece.

Which diagram is not a possible
representation of how it looks from the back
(i.e. the direction shown by the arrow)? The
shaded areas are recesses.
A

B

D

C

E

Commentary
There must be some sort of recess in the
top-left corner (top back right as shown on the
3-D drawing). We cannot tell whether it goes
right to the bottom as shown in A and B or just
some of the way down as shown in C, D and E.
Similarly, there is a recess that goes through
to the right-hand edge (left back on the 3-D
drawing). Those shown in A, C and E would all
give the same 3-D view from the front. We can
now eliminate A, C and E, as both the rear
features are shown as being possible.
(Remember that we are looking for the
diagram that is not a possible representation.)
D joins up the two recesses – this would also be
possible as the join would not show from the
angle originally shown.
We have come to the answer B by
elimination. This is a completely valid way of
proceeding, but it would be useful to check
that this is indeed the correct answer. The
recess shown in green on the right-hand side
of diagram B would be visible at the back of
the lowest section of the three-dimensional
drawing. So B is not possible.
Once again, this is more difficult than
might be expected. We do not actually know
what the hidden reverse side looks like – there
are an infinite number of possibilities. All we
can do is consider what hints are given by the
three-dimensional picture. One primary
feature of this type of question is that the
answer cannot be produced just by
considering the information given and the
question. This is a backward question. The five
options must all be looked at and a decision
made on whether each is possible. Backward
questions are a regular feature of questions on
spatial reasoning, and of identifying
similarity, which was dealt with in Chapter 3.7.
They do not occur very often in the other
types of question. The value of elimination
was shown in the method of answering this
type of question.

3.9 Spatial reasoning 113

Summary
• This chapter introduced questions that are
backward in that the answer must be found
from the options rather than just from the
information and the question.
• The use of elimination in answering such
questions was illustrated.

• We have seen the importance of spatial
reasoning in many occupations and how
problem-solving questions can test this.
• The value of practice in solving this type of
question has been emphasised.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Fred wants to write the letters NSRFC
on his forehead for this afternoon’s
Northampton Saints Rugby Football Club
match. He does it with face paints while
looking in a mirror. What should it look like
in the mirror?
2 Draw a simple picture of your house or
another building with which you are familiar
as seen from above and from the front.
How much can you tell about the side and
back views from your drawings?
3 Outside the Diorama hotel there is a set
of flagpoles, as shown in the drawing. The
flagpoles are all painted different colours
(red, blue, yellow, green, orange, white).
R

Y

O

B

G

W

X

When they are seen from position X, they are
seen in the order (from left to right): R B Y O
G W.

114 Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

		 If somebody walks from X to Y, in how
many, and what, different orders will they
see the flagpoles? (Exclude places where
one is exactly hidden behind another.)
4 Our local café has an unusual clock which
is upside down. The numbers 3 and 9 are
in their conventional places, but 6 and 12
are interchanged. What time is it when the
hands are positioned as in the clock face
shown?

Y

	
A 2.45   B 7.15   C 8.45  
D 10.15 E 10.45

5 The solid shown, which is a cube with two
corners cut off, is made from a shaped
and folded piece of cardboard. (The dotted
lines represent edges which are hidden.)

6 Some children are making decorations. A
square sheet of paper is folded along a
diagonal and then again so the two sharp
points meet, as shown. A cut is made
through all the layers of paper along the
dotted line shown and the small pieces
removed. The paper is then opened.

What does it look like? (Try to visualise it in
your head before you make a model to test
that your answer is right.)
Which of the following pieces of cardboard
will fold to make the shape? There may be
any number correct from none to four.
A

C

A

B

C

D

B

D

E

Answers and comments are on page 321.

3.9 Spatial reasoning 115

3.10 Necessity and sufficiency
Another type of problem involves identifying
whether there is enough data to solve the
problem and, if not, which data is missing.
This is a useful building block in problemsolving. It highlights one of the key elements
of problem solving, which is to find a way to
solve a problem without, in this case, having
to do any arithmetic.
The words ‘necessity’ and ‘sufficiency’ are
used in mathematics but have exactly the
same meaning as they do in normal language.
An individual piece of data is necessary to
solve a problem if we cannot solve the
problem without it. A set of data is sufficient
to solve a problem if it contains all the
information we need.
Identifying which data is needed to solve a
problem can save effort in finding unnecessary
data or in making unnecessary calculations.
Such questions are approached in a manner
similar to those described in earlier chapters.
To illustrate the type of question described
here, we start with a very simple example.
Suppose someone is taking a car journey. We
know their leaving time and we know the
average speed they will do. We want to know
their arrival time. Which other piece of
information is necessary for us to calculate
this?
The solution is very straightforward: we
need the distance of the journey. We can then
calculate the journey time (distance divided by
speed) and thus the arrival time. All of the
three pieces of data we now have are necessary
to do this calculation. The three pieces taken
together are sufficient.
Here is a slightly more complex example.

116 Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

Activity
I use the trip meter on my car to measure
the distance driven since I last had the car
serviced, so that I know when the next
service is due. The trip meter can be set to
zero by the press of a button and records
the kilometres driven since it was last reset.
I set the trip meter to zero after my
last service. The next service is due after
20,000 km have been driven. Some time
later, I lent the car to my brother. I forgot
to tell him about the trip meter; he
pressed the button to zero it and drove
575 km. I then started driving again
without realising what he had done.
What should the trip meter read
when the next service is due?
The above problem cannot be solved with the
information given. What additional piece of
information is needed to solve it?

Commentary
This question is actually rather easier than it
may at first seem. The distance driven from
the last service when my brother returned the
car was the distance I had driven plus the
distance he had driven. I know how far he had
driven, so what I need to know was the
distance on the trip meter when I gave the car
to my brother.
In this case, like the previous example, we
were not asked to solve the problem, merely to
identify what pieces of information were
needed to solve it. In real-life problem solving,
the data is not generally given; it has to be

found. Having the skill to know which pieces
of data are needed can save considerable time
and effort. Solving this type of problem does
not need particular mathematical skills – just
some clear and logical thinking.

Activity
I have a small collection of three types of old
coin. The collection contains 15 coins in
total. There are more pennies than halfcrowns and more half-crowns than guineas.
Which one of the following single pieces of
information would enable you to know exactly
how many of each type of coin there was?
A There are 4 more half-crowns than
guineas.
B There are 5 more pennies than
guineas.
C There are 3 more pennies than halfcrowns.
D There is one fewer penny than guineas
and half-crowns together.

Commentary
In this problem, we are being asked to find
which of the options is sufficient (along with
the information we have already been given)
to solve the problem.
There are 12 ways that 15 can be
partitioned into three different numbers:
Guineas

Half-crowns

Pennies

1

2

12

1

3

11

1

4

10

1

5

9

1

6

8

Guineas

Half-crowns

Pennies

2

3

10

2

4

9

2

5

8

2

6

7

3

4

8

3

5

7

4

5

6

Of the options given, only C gives a unique
set. If there are 3 more pennies than halfcrowns, there must be 8 pennies, 5 half-crowns
and 2 guineas.
Why do the other options not work?

Summary
• We have met a new type of problem where,
rather than being asked to find a solution,
we are asked to find what pieces of
information are necessary or sufficient to
solve it.
• We have also encountered problems where
we have to find a solution, but need to
identify an additional piece of information
which is necessary either to help us
with the method of solution or to choose
between different possible solutions.
• We have learned the meaning, in this
context, of the words ‘necessary’ and
‘sufficient’.
• We have seen various types of problem
which require extra data: some needing
mathematical solutions; some only
requiring us to establish a logical method
of solution.

3.10 Necessity and sufficiency 117

End-of-chapter assignments
1 I have made a dice out of a sheet of
cardboard in the form of an octahedron,
which has eight faces as shown below.

	I now want to number the faces from
1 to 8. The numbers on opposite faces
must add up to 9, so when I number a face
1, the opposite face must be 8.
		 If I start with number 1 and work up,
how many faces can I number before I am
left with no choice about where to put the
numbers?
2 (Harder task) George stocks bags of
pears and bananas in his shop. Each
bag contains either five pears or three
bananas. He wanted to know how many to
order to keep his stocks up, so he sent his

assistant to count the bags. However, the
assistant, not being very bright, counted
the total number of pieces of fruit instead.
George was about to send him back to
repeat it when he realised that the number
that the assistant had given him was not
only sufficient information for him to work
out how many bags there were of each, but
was also the maximum such number. How
many bags of pears and bananas were
there?
3 Kuldip told me she had 12 coins in her
pocket, all either 1¢, 2¢ or 5¢, with a
different number of each denomination.
There were more 2¢ than 1¢ coins and
more 5¢ than 2¢ coins. She asked me
how much money she had in her pocket
altogether. I told her that I did not have
enough information to answer.
		 Which of the following additional pieces
of information would enable me to know
how much money she had in his pocket?
A She had three 2¢ coins.
B The total amount of money was a
multiple of 10¢.
C 5¢ coins amounted to 3 4 of the total
value.
D She had two more 5¢ coins than 1¢
and 2¢ together.
Answers and comments are on pages 321–2.

118 Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

3.11 Choosing and using models
The most obvious and familiar use of the word
‘model’ is that of a replica of an object, for
example a car, at a smaller scale. In this book
the word is used in a wider sense. Models can
be pictures, graphs, descriptions, equations,
word formulae or computer programs, which
are used to represent objects or processes.
These are sometimes called ‘mathematical
models’; they help us to understand how
things work and give simplified
representations that can enable us to do ‘what
if?’ type calculations.
Architects, for example, use a wide range of
models. They may build a scale model of a
building to let the client see it and to give a
better impression of how it will look. Their
drawings are also models of the structure of
the building. In modern practice, these
drawings are made on a computer, which will
contain a three-dimensional model of the
building in digital form. This may be used to
estimate material costs and carry out
structural calculations as well as producing a
three-dimensional ‘walk-through’ picture on
the screen.
This chapter deals with the recognition and
use of appropriate models. A simple example
of a model is a word formula used to calculate
cost. The amount of a quarterly electricity bill
can be described as ‘A standing charge of $35
plus 10¢ per unit of electricity used’. This may
equally be shown algebraically as:
c = 35 + 0.1u
where c is the amount to pay (in dollars) and
u is the number of units used.
A more complicated example of a model
would be the type that governments set up to
simulate their economies. These usually

consist of large numbers of equations and
associated data, and are implemented on
computers. They can predict (with varying
success) things such as what will happen to
the inflation rate if interest rates are raised.
Such models are gross simplifications because
there are too many variables contributing to
the condition of a national economy and all
factors can never be included.
Scientists also use models, for example in
predicting population growth. Such a model,
for example, to predict fish stocks in fishing
areas, can be invaluable as it may be used to
control quotas on fish catches to ensure that
fishing does not reduce stocks to
unsustainable levels.
In both of these cases, the model has been
produced as a result of a problem-solving
exercise. The actual development of a model to
represent a process is beyond the multiplechoice questions in the lower-level thinking
skills examinations and will be dealt with in
Chapter 5.2. Multiple-choice questions on
choosing and using models test some of the
basic skills involved in modelling and the
extraction of data from mathematical models.
In the following activity you are asked to
use different models to compare calculations.
This example is close to a real-life situation.

Activity
The current structure of income tax collection
in Bolandia is that the first $2000 of annual
earnings are tax-free (this is called the tax
threshold), then 20¢ of tax is charged on
every dollar earned over this (this could also
be described as a 20% tax rate).

3.11 Choosing and using models 119

The government is determined to reduce
the tax burden on lower-paid people and
intends to bring in a new system, which will
mean that the threshold for paying tax will
rise to $10,000. They intend that all those
below the average earnings of $26,000 will
pay less tax, and all those earning more than
this will pay more tax. What will be the tax
rate on earnings over $10,000?

mathematics. What effect would these
changes have on someone earning $50,000
a year?
As an exercise, consider other possible tax
structures which might give similar results.
Plotting graphs of tax paid against earnings
gives a clearer representation of how the
various models of taxation work. The graph
below shows the tax paid under the current
system of tax in the example above.

The model of tax used here is quite simple,
consisting of a fixed amount of income on which
no tax is paid and a single standard rate on
earnings above this amount. Currently, those
earning $26,000 pay (26,000−2000) × 0.2 dollars,
or $4800. If they are to pay the same under the
new regime, they will pay tax on $16,000, and
the total will be the same as before, i.e. $4800.
The new tax rate will be 30¢ on each dollar
earned over $10,000 ($16,000 × 0.3 = $4800).
This could be done by algebra, but the process
is no simpler than that given above, which
requires no more than elementary school

Tax due

Commentary

12,000
10,000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0

0

10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000
Annual earnings

Add lines for the proposed new system and
for any other model you may think of.
The next activity, below, requires you to go
some way towards developing a mathematical
model of a new situation in order to solve the
question.

Activity
My company regularly uses a taxi service to
take staff to the airport. If there are several
passengers needing to travel from our town
at similar times, they combine this into a
single journey. They divide the total cost by
the number of passengers and invoice each
passenger separately. The distance is always
the same and the time only varies by a small
amount, but I do not know how they work out
the charge for the journey.

Number of passengers
Charge per journey per passenger

120 Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

There are a number of different charging
structures they could use. All taxis charge a
fixed price per kilometre and per minute of
journey time. In addition they may charge a
fixed hire fee and an additional charge
depending on the number of passengers
carried.
What is the charging structure used by this
taxi company? What limitations are there to
the conclusions we can derive?

1

2

3

4

5

$40.00

$19.98

$14.68

$12.03

$10.38

Commentary
If we just look at the data as it stands the
pattern is not clear, other than that the price
per passenger drops with the number of
passengers. Since we are looking at the charge
made by the taxi company, it is preferable to
look at the total cost of the taxi in each case.
This may be carried out by multiplying the
cost per passenger by the number of
passengers, as shown in the table below.
The pattern now becomes much clearer.
Allowing for some small variations (it was stated
that there was a small variation in journey
time), the first two values are the same and they
then increase by $4 per passenger. We can,
therefore, conclude that the taxi company hire
fee includes one or two passengers, then there is
an extra charge of $4 per additional passenger.
The $40 ‘basic’ fee covers the hire charge, the
distance charge and an average time charge. We
have no information which will enable us to
separate these three items. A model can only be
as good as the data on which it is based.
Number of passengers

A graph can be a very useful tool for
analysing data such as in the table below, and
can also help in developing models. Try
graphing the data, for both the cost per
passenger and the total cost per journey. Does
this help in clarifying the charging structure?
The activity above introduced the idea that
models usually are approximations to the real
world. The model used did not allow for
variations in the time of the journey. This is
why the word ‘model’ is used. Almost all
models are approximate – the model car does
not usually have an internal combustion
engine. Economic models cannot take into
account factors such as the weather.
Many people use models in their everyday
lives without even realising it. An efficient
shopkeeper will, for example, have a set of
rules that tells her how much ice cream to
order so she has plenty in the summer months
and less stock in the winter.

1

2

3

4

5

Charge per journey per passenger

$40.00

$19.98

$14.68

$12.03

$10.38

Total charge per journey

$40.00

$39.96

$44.04

$48.12

$51.90

Summary
• We have learned how a mathematical
or graphical model may be used to
approximate real-life processes.
• We have seen how models can be used
to simulate changes in cost structure and
their effects.

• We have used real data to calculate the
constants used in a mathematical model,
for example the starting rate and charge
per mile for a taxi fare.
• A graph of any sort is a model from which
it is possible to get a picture of how
variations can occur.

3.11 Choosing and using models 121

End-of-chapter assignments
1 A novelty marketing company is selling
an unusual liquid clock. It consists of two
tubes as shown. The right-hand tube fills
up gradually so that it is full at the end
of each complete hour, and then empties
and starts again. The left-hand tube does
exactly the same in 12 hours. The time
shown on the clock is 9.15.

	 Draw what the clock looks like at 4.20.

2 Finn walks to school, a distance of 1.5 km
which takes him 15 minutes. His older
sister, Alice, cycles to school on the same
route at an average speed of 18 km/h.
She leaves home 5 minutes later than
Finn. Does she overtake him on the way
and, if so, where? At what time would she
have to leave to arrive at school at exactly
the same time as Finn?
3 A shop normally sells breakfast cereal for
$1.20 a packet. It is currently running a
promotion, so if you buy two packets, you
get a third free.
		 Tabulate and graph the price per packet
for numbers of packets bought from 1 to
10. How would other special offers (e.g.
‘Buy one, get one half price’) affect the
shape of this graph? If you were working
backwards from the graph, how could you
determine which offer is currently being
used?
Answers and comments are on pages 322–3.

122 Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

3.12 Making choices and
decisions

Many of the problems we encounter in
everyday life involve making choices and
decisions. To buy or not to buy? Which one
to buy? How much to buy? Which train to
take? All these are types of choice and
decision that contribute to problem-solving
processes and involve the use of skills that
can be tested by problem-solving questions.
These questions may involve skills that have
been covered in earlier chapters: extracting
information, processing data and finding
methods of solution. The only real difference is
that the question asks for a decision to be made.
The following is an example of such a question.

Activity
My local shops all have different discounts
on jars of coffee. Which of the following
represents the best value for money?
A Everlo: $1.29 for a 150 g jar
B Foodland: $2.89 for 200 g, buy one
get one free
C Springway: $3.36 for 300 g, buy one
get the second half price
D Superval: $1.57 for 150 g, 50¢
voucher off the next 150 g (one
voucher per customer)
E Massive: $1.57 for a 150 g jar with
50 g extra coffee free

A is 2 × $1.29 = $2.58 for 300 g
B gives 400 g for $2.89, so 300 g is 0.75 ×
$2.89 = $2.17
C gives 600 g for 1.5 × $3.36 = $5.04 or
300 g for $2.52
D first 150 g is $1.57, second is $1.07, so
300 g is $2.64
E $1.57 for 200 g or $2.35 for 300 g
So B is the best value.
This is quite straightforward; no skills that
have not already been introduced are
involved. It is just necessary to work efficiently
and correctly, finding the most effective way
of approaching the problem.
The activity below involves making a decision.

Activity
Eve buys chickpeas in bulk to sell in her shop.
They come by volume and each drum can
contain between 10 and 12 kg. She
repackages them to sell in 0.5 kg packs. She
gets a delivery on a Monday morning and sells
anything from 8 to 15 packs in a day. She is
open 7 days a week and on Sunday night has
14 packs left and half a drum of bulk
chickpeas.
How many drums should she order to make
certain that she has enough for the next
week?
A2

B3

C4

D5

E6

Commentary
In this case it is easiest to express all the
prices to a 300 g equivalent – you may see
that this requires fewer calculations than, for
example, converting them all to 100 g.

Commentary
This is a maximum and minimum type
problem: we have to combine the most

3.12 Making choices and decisions 123

chickpeas Eve could sell with the least she has
in stock and minimum in the drums she buys.
The least she has in stock is half a drum,
which might be as little as 5kg; this will make
up a minimum of 10 packs. She has 14 packs in
stock, so at least 24 in total. She needs at most
7 × 15 = 105 packs, so may need as much as 81
× 0.5 kg = 40.5 kg. At 10 kg per drum, she will
need 5 drums to be sure she can last the week.
You might also like to work out what is the
fewest drums she might need.
This illustrates a particular type of decisions
question – where the decision is based on the
minimum (or sometimes the maximum) to
fulfil a criterion.

Summary
• We have seen how problems may involve
making choices and decisions.
• Decisions may involve selecting one item
from a number of options or making a
decision on an action.
• In solving these problems it is important
to choose an efficient way of working
so the correct answer is obtained and
calculations are carried out in the most
effective and simplest way in order to
reduce the chance of error.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 In a game of pontoon dice, you continue
throwing a single die until the sum of all
your throws exceeds 21 (bust) or you
decide to stop. You win plastic counters
depending on the score you stop at.
Stopping score

Counters won or lost

1 to 12

0

13 or 14

Win 1

15 or 16

Win 2

17 or 18

Win 3

19

Win 6

20

Win 8

21

Win 10

Over 21

Lose 4

124 Unit 3 Problem solving: basic skills

	After four throws you have scored 17.
Should you throw once more? Consider the
chances of getting different scores and how
much you will win or lose. What is best on
average?
		 What should you do if you have a score
other than 17?
2 Clyde’s local supermarket has an offer
on petrol, depending on the amount you
spend in the store. If you spend $20–$30
you get a voucher that gives you 2¢ per
litre off petrol; if you spend $30–$50, you
get 3¢ per litre off; and if you spend over
$50 you get 4¢ per litre off. Clyde’s car will
take 30 litres of petrol.
		 Consider for what range of total
purchase prices in the supermarket it is
worth his buying a small amount extra, so
that the reduction in the petrol cost will
make his total bill smaller.
3 Students at a school have to decide what
subjects they are going to study next year.
English, science and mathematics are
all compulsory, but they can choose the
remaining four subjects.

		 The table shows how the choices can
be made. Students must choose one
subject from each column. The fourth
subject may come from any column.
1

2

3

geography

French

history

technology

German

religious studies

art

physical education

music

Latin

4 The country of Danotia prints stamps in
the following denominations:
	1¢, 2¢, 5¢, 9¢, 13¢, 22¢, 36¢, 50¢,
$1.00, $5.00
	A mail order company sends out equal
numbers of three sizes of package, which
incur postal charges of 34¢, 67¢ and
$1.43. They want to stock as few different
denominations of stamp as possible (but
not only 1¢ stamps as sticking lots of
these on envelopes would be a nuisance!).
		 Which ones should they stock?
Answers and comments are on page 323.

	Which of the following combinations would
not be allowable?
A French, geography, physical
education, art
B French, German, Latin, music
C technology, German, art, history
D French, German, geography, music
E geography, music, French, religious
studies

3.12 Making choices and decisions 125

Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

4.1 Inference
The verb ‘infer’ means to draw a conclusion,
usually from some factual (or supposedly
factual) information. The information
provides the grounds for the inference. If the
grounds are good, we say that the inference is
sound, or reliable. Another word that is often
used is ‘safe’. If the grounds for an inference
are poor, we have to say that the inference is
unsafe: it cannot be relied upon.
Judging whether an inference is safe is
therefore similar to judging whether an
argument is sound. The main difference is that
in a standard argument the conclusion is
stated. In many texts and documents,
however, there is no explicit conclusion. There
may be claims; there may be information. But
unless some further inference is drawn from
the information, there is no argument.
Sometimes there may be an implicit
conclusion, where the information is clearly
leading in one particular direction, and it is
obvious what we are meant to infer. There is an
example in Chapter 2.4, item [7] (page 34).
Here is another example (the subject may
sound familiar):
[1] These banknotes all have the same
serial number. All genuine banknotes
have different numbers.
This time the conclusion has been left unsaid.
But it is clear what the author is getting at. If
asked what can be inferred from [1] most
people would probably answer that:
[2] The banknotes are not all genuine.
Moreover this would be a safe inference,
because [1] provides very good grounds for [2].
Of course [2] is not the only inference that
could be drawn from [1]. Nor is it the only safe
one. [1] also gives good grounds for inferring

126 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

that I would be committing an offence if I
tried to spend these banknotes. I would need
to know that passing false currency is illegal,
but that is such common knowledge that it
practically goes without saying.
It would be fairly safe, too, to infer from [1]
that
[3] The banknotes are forgeries,
on the reasonable assumption that only
forgeries could have duplicate numbers. By
contrast it would be entirely unsafe to infer
that
[4] The banknotes are the work of terrorists,
intent on destabilising the economy.
Inferring [4] from [1] would be a blatant
example of jumping to a conclusion.

Inference and science
Drawing inferences, and judging the reliability
of inferences, are especially important in
scientific contexts. Scientists typically base
their claims to knowledge on the information
they collect from observation and experiment.
Because we cannot confirm the truth of such
claims without supporting evidence, we have
at least to be sure that the evidence is strong
and the inference is reliable. Assessing what
can and cannot be inferred from a given
document is therefore a key component of
critical thinking.
Here is a short introductory example:

DOC 1
Ice ages last for roughly 100,000 years,
going by the record of the past half-million
years. The warm phases in between are
called interglacials. The standard view,
until quite recently, has been that we are

Commentary
coming to the end of the present warm
phase, which has already lasted just over
10,000 years. Indeed, data from Antarctic
ice cores* indicated that the previous
three interglacials have lasted between
6000 and 9000 years which, if repeated,
would have seen parts of Europe, Asia and
North America covered in ice since before
the rise of the Roman Empire. The most
recent Antarctic ice cores have revealed
that the warm phase before that lasted for
30,000 years. It is known, too, that the
Earth’s alignment relative to the Sun during
that long interglacial was similar to its
alignment at the present time.
* An ice core is a sample obtained by drilling
down into the ice cap. The state of the ice at
different levels provides a climatic record that
can extend over hundreds of thousands of
years.

Activity
From the information in Doc 1, which of the
following can reliably be concluded?
A Another ice age is due any millennium
now.
B The standard view is wrong.
C The present warm phase is set to last
another 20,000 years.
D According to the recent geological
record, ice-age conditions are the norm,
and it is Earth’s present climate which
is unusual.
E Global warming is delaying the start of
the next ice age.
Give a brief reason for each response.

We’ll consider the inferences in turn. The first
one, A, as well as being a bit vague, has little
support from the text. If we take ‘any
millennium now’ to mean in the next one or
two – which is its natural meaning – then A
would mean sticking with the standard view,
despite the most recent findings casting doubt
upon it. The standard view is that the present
warm phase should be reaching its time limit;
but according to the last three warm phases the
limit has already been passed. The latest ice core
also suggests that some interglacials could last
as long as 30,000 years. Evidence that the
Earth’s present alignment with the Sun’s rays
resembles that of the last long interglacial,
pours even more cold water on A. (Interestingly,
even without the most recent evidence, the
grounds for A would still be weak: half-amillion years is a blink of an eye in geological
terms, and the sample of just three warm
phases is too small to call a reliable trend.)
B might seem consistent with what has just
been said about A. If we are not near the start of
a new ice age, the standard view must be
wrong. But there is a lot of difference between
saying that an inference is unsafe, and
declaring it false. B is a much stronger claim
than can be supported by the data in Doc 1. We
might be near the end of a warm phase: one
that is longer than the last three and shorter
than the one before that. There is little or no
positive evidence for such a claim; but nor is
there proof that it is false. Remember the
significance of strong and weak claims (see
Chapter 2.2). A strong claim requires much
more to justify it than a more moderate claim.
Had B asserted that the standard view is now
less plausible than it was, instead of plainly
false, that would have been defensible.
C suffers from the same fault as B: it, also, is
too strong. A single example of a 30,000-year

4.1 Inference 127

warm phase, coinciding with a particular
alignment of the Earth and Sun, is far from
adequate to justify an out-and-out prediction
that the present interglacial will also last that
long. No serious scientist would go so far. The
author of the Geological Society webpage
from which the information is Doc 1 was
sourced claims only that:
F On these grounds, even without human
intervention, another 20,000 years of
warmth may be expected.
Compare this with C. Although it is drawing
broadly the same conclusion, it expresses it in a
careful way which would permit its author to
fend off objections. Another 20,000 years may be
expected, on the evidence supplied. That claim
does not cease to be true, at the time of making
it, even if in 10,000 years’ time it turns out to
have been optimistic. Nor will F be falsified if
new, contrary evidence comes to light, because
the author has qualified the claim by prefacing it
with: ‘On these grounds . . .’ You should
remember these details of presentation when
you are constructing your own arguments. They
may seem like purely linguistic points; but they
can make the difference between inferring
something that can be substantiated, and
something that cannot.
Whoever inferred D has taken the right sort of
care in expressing it. It is preceded by the phrase:
‘According to the recent geological record . . .’
and draws a conclusion that the record firmly
supports. Recent ice ages (geologically speaking)
have lasted between 3 and 17 times longer than
interglacials. So glacial conditions have been the
prevailing ones during that period, and it is the
Earth’s present climatic state that is unusual. D is
a safe inference.
For E to be true it would mean that the
standard view was correct after all, and/or that
the trend of the last three glaciation cycles was
continuing. It would also require global warming
to be taking place; and to be capable of delaying
the onset of an ice age. E is not impossible, but
it would take a lot more than the claims in Doc
1 to make it true. In a word, it is unsafe.

128 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

Why do we use the word ‘safe’?
The practice of calling some inferences unsafe
is a recognition of the importance of
reasoning carefully. What makes an inference
unsafe is not just that it may be wrong, but
that it may have consequences, sometimes
very serious ones. Perhaps the most obvious
illustration is a criminal trial, where a verdict
must be reached on the basis of the evidence.
A trial-verdict is a particularly serious kind of
inference, on occasions a matter of life or
death. As the result of a faulty inference, an
innocent person might go to prison for a long
time. On the other hand, a not-guilty verdict
passed on a guilty person may leave him or her
free to commit a further atrocity. You will
sometimes hear the expression, ‘That’s a
dangerous inference to make!’ We can easily
see why that is entirely appropriate.
But even if there are no obvious dire
consequences, it is still important to reason
well rather than badly, because it gets us closer
to the truth. Judging when an inference is safe
or reliable is therefore a key element in critical
thinking.

Assessing inferences
With this in mind, read the following passage
(Doc 2) and make a mental note of the
information that it contains. It introduces a
topic which will occupy the rest of the
chapter, and feature in the next two.

www.CartoonStock.com

DOC 2
The industry surrounding large
compensation claims following accidents
and personal injury has attracted much
media attention, with stories of millions of
dollars being awarded in damages to
successful claimants, and of
compensation being sought for every kind
of injury or loss. There has also been a
dramatic increase in law firms – or ‘claim
management firms’ that act as
intermediaries – canvassing for accident
victims by advertising on television, the
internet or on the street. (The phrase
‘ambulance chasers’ is often used to
describe them.) People complain of getting
unsolicited calls or text messages asking:
‘Have you had an accident that wasn’t your
fault? . . .’ or words to that effect.
Television – especially daytime television –
has a high proportion of such ads.
At the same time it has become
commonplace for lawyers to offer their
services on a no-win no-fee basis, which
allows people on low or moderate incomes
to go to court with no risk of running up
expenses they couldn’t otherwise afford.
This is also known as a ‘conditional-fee
agreement’. Lawyers earn nothing for
unsuccessful claims but are entitled to
charge up to twice their normal costs if the
claim is successful. This practice, known
as ‘uplift’, can add thousands to the bill
the losing side then has to pay out.

Activity
For each of the following statements in turn,
assess whether or not it can reliably be
concluded (inferred) from the above
passage.

A Lawyers are self-serving and
unscrupulous.
B Without the no-win no-fee option there
would be fewer claims for personal
injury.
C Advertising by law firms and/or claim
management firms encourages clients
to exaggerate or invent injuries.
D A no-win no-fee arrangement benefits
the lawyer much more than it does the
claimant.
E As long as they win more than 50% of
conditional-fee cases, a law firm need
not be out of pocket.
F Claims being pursued for personal
injury have increased significantly
since the introduction of conditionalfee agreements.

Commentary
Although the passage has a somewhat
negative tone it is not openly judgemental in
what it claims. We have to be careful,
therefore, what we read into the passage and
what we infer from it. If someone has a poor
opinion of lawyers generally, or of ‘ambulance
chasers’ in particular, it would be easy to be led
by prejudice into thinking that this document
supports those viewpoints. It does not.
You cannot, for example, infer from it that
lawyers are bad people, even if you happen to
think that they are. If you included A in your
list of safe inferences, then either you weren’t
taking the question seriously, or you were
simply giving a view based on prejudice, or
other data that is not provided here. In fact
there is practically never sufficient hard
evidence for any claim as strong, as sweeping,
or as judgemental as A. A is not even the kind
of claim that can be ordinarily inferred reliably
from purely factual information.
What about B? This certainly seems a more
reasonable inference, and a less opinionated
one. There is, too, a widely held belief that the

4.1 Inference 129

number of claims has risen significantly since
no-win no-fee agreements were introduced,
and probably because of them. Since
conditional-fee agreements give people on low
or middle incomes the chance to pursue
expensive legal actions at no financial risk to
themselves, it is natural to think that there
would be a surge in claims. But the very fact
that B seems so reasonable, and happens to be
widely believed, is precisely why we need to
approach it critically. If you already assume
that no-win no-fee arrangements have resulted
in more personal injury claims, you are likely
to see the passage as grounds for believing it.
But interpreted neutrally, the passage neither
supports B nor disputes it. All that we are told
in Doc 2 is that there are no-win no-fee
arrangements on offer, and how they work. We
are also told that this has prompted stories in
the media, but with no comment on the truth
or falsity of these, or even what they actually
claim. There is no information about the effect
the arrangements have had on numbers or
attitudes. If we stick faithfully to what is
contained in Doc 2, B must be seen as leaping
to an unjustified conclusion.
C, likewise, may seem like a very believable
consequence of advertising for victims,
especially if the advertisements emphasise the
possibility of making big money out of an
accident. Obviously, the worse the harm that
has come to the claimant, the more money
the court is likely to award in damages. So
there would be a temptation for a dishonest
person to cheat by exaggerating or inventing
an injury. But that is very different from
saying, as C does, that the advertising by law
firms and intermediaries encourages cheating.
That is a serious allegation. It is also a little
hard to believe, if it is taken to mean that
lawyers actively encourage dishonesty in the
way they advertise. But even if we interpret C
more charitably to mean that the advertising
has the unintended effect of giving some people
the idea of cheating, there is still no evidence
of any such connection in the passage.

130 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

Note that even if there were statistics showing
that since lawyers started advertising, more
dishonest claims have been lodged, that would
not permit an inference that the advertising was
the cause, or that it gave encouragement (see
cause–correlation fallacy in Chapter 2.10). In
Doc 2, however, there is not even a correlation.
We are not given any data on numbers of
dishonest claims before or after advertising
began. C is definitely not a safe conclusion.
D claims that no-win no-fee arrangements,
which on the surface look quite advantageous
for the client, are actually of more benefit to the
lawyers. Assuming that ‘benefit’ means
financial benefit, it is clear from Doc 2 that
lawyers do get some benefit from the way in
which the system works. They may lose money
when the case is unsuccessful, but they have
bigger costs awarded when they do succeed.
Provided they win more cases than they lose,
they should be better off than if they didn’t
take the case at all because the client could not
afford the fee. On the other hand, the client
benefits too, either by winning, or by having
nothing to pay if the case fails. The question is
whether the lawyer benefits more than the
client; and again we find the passage
uninformative. There is simply no data in Doc 2
by which to quantify the gains comparatively.
However, Doc 2 does give strong support to
E. This is because the information in Doc 2 is
mainly explanatory. In particular it explains
how lawyers can afford to take on cases without
charging a fee. When they win a case they get
back around twice their normal costs, to make
up for the fee they would have been paid by the
client, win or lose, under the old system. It is
simple mathematical fact that so long as they
don’t lose more cases than they win, they are
not out of pocket. If they win more cases than
they lose, they make money. We cannot infer
that they do better out of this arrangement
than the clients, as claimed by D. But if Doc 2 is
factually correct, we can quite safely infer E.
If you were really alert you might have
added that E carries the implicit assumption

that a lawyer’s cases all have the same value,
and require the same level of input in terms of
hours worked, and other costs. Arguably a
lawyer could lose a small number of very
complex cases and still be out of pocket
because they were worth more in fees than the
income generated from cases he or she won.
Strictly speaking E is safe to infer only if on
average all cases cost about the same to pursue.
And so we come to F: ‘Claims being pursued
for personal injury have increased significantly
since the introduction of conditional-fee
agreements.’ By now it should be clear that this
cannot be inferred from Doc 2 either. You may
have thought that F could be inferred because it
seems so likely to be true, given that conditionalfee agreements allow people to make claims
without having to pay anything. In that respect
F is like B. But F can only be inferred if it is also
assumed that there have been no other changes
which might have had a reverse effect. Nor can F
be inferred without assuming that lawyers now
take on more cases than they did before the
introduction of no-win no-fee. Doc 2 provides
no information to justify either of these
assumptions. In fact, the note about E in the
previous paragraph suggests that lawyers may be
much more selective than they were, since they
have more to lose. F could, quite realistically, be
false, and public opinion seriously flawed.
The clear warning to take from the
discussion above is that many seemingly
reasonable inferences were in fact unsafe. Some
of the claims may be true, and may be found to
be so after further investigation. But Doc 2, as it
stands, lacks the hard data we would need for
drawing conclusions such as B, C or F.

Popular opinion
Many people hold the opinion that there is a
growing ‘compensation culture’, with many
more claims being made for injuries – real or
otherwise – than there were, say, five or ten
years ago. Many also take the view that a lot of
the claims are bogus, or fraudulent, especially
the infamous ‘whiplash’ injury, following

quite trivial car accidents. The writer Andrew
Malleson wrote a book called Whiplash and
Other Useful Illnesses. The content is serious,
but the book’s tongue-in-cheek title tells its
own story.
Here is another document, this time
graphical. It consists of three bar charts. (See
Chapters 3.7 and 5.4 for further questions of this
type.) The data is from an official questionnaire
conducted among 509 randomly selected adults
living in the UK. However, it probably reflects
opinion in many developed countries.

DOC 3
CHART 1
Compared with ve years ago, do you think there
has been a change in the number of people receiving
compensation payments for personal injuries?
%

A lot more people
receiving payments

67

A few more people

20

Virtually no change
Fewer people

5
1

* Respondents who answered ‘Don’t know’ have been
excluded from chart.

CHART 2
Compared with ve years ago, do you think there has
been a change in the number of people making false claims?
%

A lot more people
making false claims

50

A few more people

29

Virtually no change
Fewer people

8
2

* Respondents who answered ‘Don’t know’ have been
excluded from chart.

4.1 Inference 131

CHART 3
‘I might be tempted to make an exaggerated claim for a personal injury, even if I didn't have
a strong case for compensation.’ To what extent do you agree or disagree with this statement?
Disagree strongly Disagree slightly Neither
%
%
%

64

All adults

Agree
slightly
%

Agree
strongly
%

12

8

8

5

Those who watch daytime TV

67

13

7

7

5

Those who have recently
seen a personal injury claims ad

65

12 8

8

9

5

*Respondents who answered ‘Don’t know’ have been excluded from chart.

Take some time to think about and/or discuss
the following questions, before reading the
commentaries that follow.

Activity
1 Which of the following are supported by
the information in Chart 1? (The answer
may be any, none or all.)
Assume that the data is accurate and that
the sample of people questioned is
representative of the population.
A There is a widespread and strong
belief that more people are receiving
compensation for personal injuries
now than five years ago.
B 87% of those responding to the
survey believe that there are more
people receiving payments for
personal injury compensation than
there were five years ago.
C Claims being pursued for personal
injury have increased significantly in
the past five years.

132 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

Commentary
The first point to make is that the data
concerns public opinion. The first of the three
claims is therefore clearly supported by the
data. (As a matter of interest, it is the
conclusion that the researchers drew
themselves.) Only 1 in 20 people thought that
there had been no change. Well over half
thought that the change was substantial in
favour of more people receiving payments.
This indicates a ‘widespread and strong belief’,
and makes A a safe conclusion. The question
of whether the sample was representative need
not concern you, as you were told to assume
that the figures are accurate and well
researched.
Claim B is a more direct interpretation of
the data, and simple arithmetic shows that it
too is a safe inference. Claim A is true because
claim B is true.
Claim C is more complex and more
interesting. It would seem reasonable to argue
that if there are more people receiving
payments, there are more claims being made.
But ultimately C rests on the assumption that

there really are more payments being made;
or, in other words, that the widespread belief
expressed by those questioned is correct. It is
this step which is the problem: reasoning from
the evidence that most people believe
something, to the conclusion that it is true or
probable, is a classic fallacy known by the
Latin argumentum ad populum. If you prefer
more modern names there are plenty to
choose from: appeal to popular opinion,
appeal to consensus, appeal to the majority,
the authority of the many over the few. The
weakness of this argument is nicely captured
by the old joke that 40,000 lemmings can’t all
be wrong. (The joke is that every so often
whole colonies of lemmings are believed to
run to the edge of the nearest cliff and plunge
to their deaths!) C therefore is not a safe
inference.

Activity
2 Suppose the majority view represented
in Chart 1 is correct. Would it follow that
there has been a change in the number of
people making false claims?

putting in false claims, and that would
explain the rise in the number of claims
generally.
These are plausible hypotheses, but they are
poorly supported by the data in the charts. The
fact that one thing would explain another if it
were true, does not not permit us to infer that
it is true. In some circumstances this can be a
powerful argument; but as you discovered in
Chapter 2.10, it can also be a dangerous one.
(Remember the Bayside fish restaurant. Just
because food poisoning would explain why a
restaurant has closed, it does not follow that
food poisoning occurred or came from the
restaurant.) In the present case, just because
cheating would explain rising claims, it does
not mean there is widespread cheating. There
are many other equally plausible reasons why
claims could be increasing in frequency, if
they are.

Activity
3 Does the data in Chart 3 contradict the
data in Chart 2?

Commentary
Commentary
This is another complex question. What
makes it so is that it is hypothetical. We don’t
know whether the opinions represented in
Chart 1 are true or not. The question is: If the
sample of public opinion is right and there has
been a big increase in claims, can we infer that
a significant number of people are making
false claims?
Why might this be true? Well, if it is
correct, as it is widely believed, that there are
more people getting money for injuries,
others may see this as a way of getting some
money themselves. It is a sad fact that there
are dishonest people who will seize such
opportunities. Then again, it might be the
other way round: that with the help of no-win
no-fee agreements more people have begun

A comparison of Charts 2 and 3 is very
interesting. According to Chart 2, most people
evidently believe that there is an increased level
of dishonest claiming going on, and half of
those questioned believe that there is a big
increase. But if Chart 3 is anything to go by, very
few people say that they would so much as
exaggerate a claim. Even those who watch
daytime TV (which, we were told, carries a lot of
advertising by the so-called ‘ambulance
chasers’), or who have seen a claims
advertisement recently, say they are no more
likely to claim than the general sample of the
population. Remember, too, that being tempted
to do something and actually doing it are two
different things. Of the 13% of all adults who
said they might be tempted at all, how many
would have gone as far as making a false claim?

4.1 Inference 133

We simply cannot say. We also have to wonder
whether those questioned in the Chart 3
survey would all have answered truthfully.
There is no contradiction here. If 13% of all
adults are willing to admit to being tempted to
exaggerate a claim, that could result in a
considerable and increasing number of actual
claims. It could certainly be a sufficient
number to explain why many believe that
there was a significant increase in dishonest

claims. But even if that widespread belief
(shown by Chart 2) is unfounded, it is not
because the data in Chart 3 contradicts it.
It is perfectly rational for people to hold the
two views: (1) that there are more cheats than
there were; but (2) that they wouldn’t cheat
themselves. These do not conflict; so nor do
the two sets of data.
Before answering the next question, there
is a further short document to read:

DOC 4

How did no-win no-fee change things?
Ten years after the introduction of no-win no-fee agreements the UK Compensation
Recovery Unit reported that the number of cases registered to the unit had remained
relatively stable. In 2000/1 there were 735,931. The number in 2007/8 was 732,750.
For example, clinical negligence cases notified to the unit fell from 10,890 in
2000/1 to 8872 in 2007/8. Accidents at work cases fell from 97,675 in 2000/1 to
68,497 in 2007/8. Only motor accident claims have risen rapidly, rocketing from
403,892 cases in 2004/5 to 551,899 cases in 2007/8.
In its 2006 report on the ‘compensation culture’, the House of Commons Constitutional
Affairs Committee heard evidence that personal injury claims had gone up from about
250,000 in the early 1970s to the current level, but that the introduction of no-win no-fee
had coincided with this levelling off.
Lawyers dispute the claim that no-win no-fee inevitably leads to more frivolous
claims and more cases generally. They say the solicitor acts as a filter, knowing that
every case that doesn’t make it to court or a settlement is a financial loss to the firm.
BBC News Magazine

134 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

Activity
4 Can it reliably be concluded from the
information in the three charts and Doc 4
that public perceptions about false or
exaggerated compensation claims are
seriously mistaken?

Commentary
This is a more open question than the others,
and consequently there is more than one
direction that your discussion could have
taken, and more than one decision you could
have reached. What matters most is not which
answer you gave, but why you gave it; how you
interpreted the evidence. You could, for
example, have noted that there is something
of a contradiction between what the majority
think (Chart 1) and the official figures (Doc 4,
paragraphs 1 and 2). Those figures reveal that
the number of claims overall has ‘remained
relatively stable’, or even fallen slightly over
the period in question, with examples of
medical claims and work-accident claims both
being down. If the total number of claims has
fallen, it seems groundless to infer that the
number of false claims has risen. You might
also have added the point, already made in the
comments after Activity 3, that Chart 3 casts
some doubt on the belief that false claims are
soaring. Your answer could therefore have
been that the public perception is simply false.

However, Doc 4 also reveals that the small
reduction in claims generally contrasts with a
massive increase in motor accident claims in
particular. If that rise is the result of an
increase in false and exaggerated claims, then
the public perception could be justified. A
good answer to the question will therefore
recognise that the evidence is inconclusive,
with some of the facts pointing in one
direction, some in another. This need not stop
you drawing a conclusion, but it should not be
too strong or overstated. If you inferred that
the majority were clearly correct in their
opinions, or completely wrong, without
acknowledging the room for doubts, your
conclusion would be unsafe.

Summary
• When presented with a source of
information, whether in text form or
numerical or graphical, we often draw
conclusions / make inferences.
• A ‘safe’ (reliable, sound) inference is one
that has strong support from some or all
of the available data, and is not obviously
contradicted by other data.
• To be ‘safe’ an inference or conclusion
must be more than just plausible or
reasonable. It must follow from the data.

4.1 Inference 135

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Based on the discussions you have had
and the commentaries you have read, write
a short answer to each of the following
questions. (These are good preparation
for some of the questions in Cambridge
Thinking Skills Papers 2 and 4.)
a Does advertising, especially on daytime
television, encourage people to make
dishonest claims for personal injury?
b Does the statistical information in Doc
4 on page 134 contradict the view that
claims for personal injury are on the
increase?
2 How much can be inferred, reliably, from a
photograph such as the one here?

photograph was conclusive evidence that a
crime was being committed. On the other
hand there is enough detail in the picture
to raise suspicions. Assuming that this
was a genuine action-shot, and not posed,
consider these four possible accounts of
what is happening in the photograph:
A The person on the left of the picture
is snatching a bag from the shoulder
of the other, and is about to run off
with it.
B The person on the left is attempting
to take something out of the bag.
C The person on the left has
accidentally made contact with the
person on the right.
D The two people in the picture are
friends walking together by a lake or
river.
	Then either decide which of the above
explanations can most safely be inferred,
or if you think none of the above is a safe
inference, suggest one that is.
		 Write a short justification for your
conclusion, based on clues you can find
in the picture. (For convenience call the
person on the left of the picture ‘L’, and
the one on the right ‘R’.)
3 ‘It is believed in many countries around
the world, including the UK, that there is a
damaging “compensation culture”.’
		 How much support is there for this
belief in Docs 2–4? Your response should
take the form of a short written essay.

	Without some background information
it would be unsafe to say that this

136 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

Answers and comments are on page 323.

4.2 Explanation
In this chapter we return to an important
concept that was introduced in Chapter 2.8,
namely explanation. Explanation, like
argument, involves giving reasons. But
explanatory reasons do not lead to
conclusions, as reasons do in arguments.
Examine the following short passages.
[1a] Seawater is salty. This is because the
river water that drains into the oceans
flows over rocks and soil. Some of the
minerals in the rocks, including salt,
dissolve in the water and are carried
down to the sea.
[1b] The river water that drains into the
oceans flows over rocks and soil. Some
of the minerals in the rocks, including
salt, dissolve in the water and are
carried down to the sea. Consequently
seawater is salty.
These are both explanations. To be more
precise they are the same explanation, with
slightly different wording. Typically,
explanations tell us why something is as it is,
or how it has come about. The explanation
here consists of two reasons: (a) that rivers
flow over rocks and soil; and (b) that the rocks
and soil contain minerals that dissolve in the
water. These two reasons, between them,
explain a fact, the saltiness of seawater. But the
saltiness of seawater is not a conclusion or
inference drawn from [1a] and [1b]. Most of us
don’t need any argument to convince or
persuade us that seawater is salty. We have the
evidence of our senses. We can taste it, which
is a good enough reason to take it as fact.
This is the key difference between an
argument and an explanation. Arguments are
meant to give us reasons to believe something
which we did not know, or were less sure of,

before hearing the argument. That is what we
call a ‘conclusion’. Explanations work in the
opposite direction: they take something that
we know or just assume to be true, and help us
to understand it. Explanation plays a very
important role in science; and it is easy to see
why. One of the main goals of science – if not
the main goal – is to discover how and why
things are as they are: what causes them, what
makes them happen. Once we can fully
explain something, such as the saltiness of
seawater, we can go on to predict or infer all
sorts of other related facts or phenomena.

Need for explanations
Explanations are particularly useful when
there is something surprising or puzzling that
needs to be ‘explained away’; or where there is
a discrepancy between two facts or
observations; or where there is an anomaly in
a set of facts. (An anomaly is an exception:
something unexpected or out of the ordinary.)
If a patient’s blood pressure is being
monitored, and on a particular day it is much
higher or lower than on all the other days, that
would be classed as an anomalous reading, and
might well lead the doctor to look for or
suggest an explanation.
Here is an observation that would seem to
be at odds with [1a] and [1b]:
[X]

River water does not taste salty.

We are told by the scientists that seawater gets
its saltiness from the rivers that flow into it. So
why can we not taste the salt in the river?
Unless you know the explanation, there
appears to be a discrepancy here: if one tastes
so strongly of salt, why does the other taste
fresh? By analogy, if you poured some water
from a jug (the river) into an empty bowl

4.2 Explanation 137

(the ocean), and then found that the water in
the bowl tasted salty, but the remaining water
in the jug did not, you would be right to feel
puzzled. You would probably infer that there
had been some trick, since fresh water cannot
turn into salt water just by being poured!

Activity
Give a concise explanation for the fact that
rivers taste fresh and the sea salty. You may
know the reason, in which case just write it
down as if you were explaining for someone
who did not know. If you don’t know the
reason, try coming up with a hypothesis; then
do some research, on the internet or in the
library, to find out if you were right.

Commentary
The scientific explanation is as follows. The
water that flows into the oceans does not all
remain there. The sun’s energy causes it to
evaporate, after which it condenses again and
falls as rain or snow. The rainwater finds its
way back into the rivers and carries more salt
down to the sea. This process goes on in a
continuous cycle (part of what is called the
‘water cycle’). The key to the explanation is
that when the seawater evaporates, it leaves
the salt and other minerals behind, so that
over an extended period of time (millions of
years) the salt becomes increasingly
concentrated in the oceans. The relatively
small amounts of salt that dissolve in a volume
of river water as it flows to the sea aren’t
enough to give it a taste. Besides, rivers are
constantly being refreshed by new rain and
melting ice or snow.
The analogy of the jug and the bowl is
therefore a bad one. It misses out the key
factors of evaporation and the large timescale.
To explain why seas are salty and rivers are
fresh, you have to include the fact that the
process has taken a very long time.

138 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

Suggesting explanations: plausibility
In the previous example the explanation is
grounded on good scientific evidence. If there
were any doubt about it, scientists could
measure the minerals that are dissolved in rivers;
they could test rainwater and confirm that it is
pure, and so on. But not all facts or happenings
can be explained with the same confidence,
either because they are more complex, or
because there is limited available data.
Science is not the only field in which
explanation is needed to account for facts.
Historians, for example, do not just list the
things that have happened in the past, any
more than scientists just list observations and
phenomena. Like scientists, historians try to
work out why events happened, what their
causes were. For example, take the following
piece of factual information:

DOC A
In October 333 BC, Alexander’s Macedonian
force confronted the Persian king Darius III
and his army at Issus. The Macedonians,
though more disciplined than the Persians,
were hugely outnumbered. Yet, surprisingly, in
the furious encounter that followed, it was
Darius’s massive force that fled in defeat,
leaving Alexander victorious.
This is neither an argument nor an
explanation. It is simply a series of informative
claims; a statement of historical fact. However,
it is a fact in need of an explanation because, as
the text says, it is a surprising fact. Normally, if
one side in a battle hugely outnumbers the
other, the larger army wins, unless there is
some other reason for the outcome. If the larger
army wins no one is very surprised. No one is
likely to ask: How did such a big army beat such
a small one? Usually it is only when the result is
unexpected that we want to know why.
With this case, as with many other
historical events, we don’t know for certain
why or how Alexander turned the tables on
Darius. But there are many possible

explanations which, if true, would explain the
outcome of the battle, against all the odds.
Alexander may have used better tactics. He
may have had better weapons. He may have
been a more inspiring leader than Darius.
The small numbers may have made the
Macedonian army more mobile, easier to
command. The Persians may have been tired,
or sick, or suffering from low morale. They
may have been overconfident because they
had more soldiers and were taken by surprise
by the ferocity of their enemy, and so on. One
or more of these possibilities could have been
sufficient to change the course of the battle
away from the foregone conclusion that most
people would have predicted. We cannot say
which, if any, really was a factor, still less
the decisive factor, on the day. All we can say
with certainty is that there are competing
hypotheses. But we can make some valid
judgements: we can assess the competing
explanations in terms of their plausibility. We
can ask, of a proposed explanation: Would it,
if true, have explained why the battle went
Alexander’s way? If the answer is yes, it is a
plausible explanation, even though we cannot
infer that it is the explanation.
Conversely, we can say that certain
statements would not adequately explain the
outcome even if known to be true. The fact
that Alexander’s soldiers were Macedonian is
not an adequate reason, though it is a fact. It
might be adequate if we also knew that
Macedonians were particularly skilled or
ferocious or dedicated fighters; but on its own
the fact of being Macedonian does not explain
their victory. Similarly, if we were told that
Alexander later became known as ‘Alexander
the Great’, that would not explain the victory.
It is his victories which explain why he was
called ‘the Great’. Nor would the fact that
Darius’s soldiers fled when they realised they
were beaten count as an explanation: it would
just be another way of saying that they were
defeated, not a reason why.

Don’t jump to conclusions
You saw both in the previous chapter and in
Chapter 2.10 that some of the worst reasoning
errors come from jumping to conclusions.
This is a particularly strong temptation when
inferring causal explanations. Suggesting
explanations is fine. Assessing their
plausibility is fine. But just because an
explanation is plausible it doesn’t follow that
it is true. If it were a fact that Darius had a huge
but poorly trained army, that could explain the
Persian defeat at Issus. But so might good
training explain the Macedonian victory.
Moreover, it might be neither of these. It
might be something quite unlikely.
Conceivably the battle was determined by
Alexander’s mother casting a magic spell, or
laying a curse! This may seem fanciful and
implausible. We don’t really believe these days
in spells and curses as real causes. But
sometimes the wildest theories turn out to be
correct. It is fairly well documented that in
ancient times people were much more
superstitious than they are today. Oracles and
soothsayers were taken seriously and consulted
before decisions were made; witches were
burned for the evil powers they were thought
to possess. Had a spell been cast, and believed,
the psychological effect could have been quite
potent. It might have filled one side with
confidence, and/or the other side with terror.

Judging alternative explanations
It is all very well to say that if something were
true it would explain a fact. The mistake is to
move too quickly from the discovery of a
satisfying and credible explanation to the
inference that the explanation is true.
Explanations need to be evaluated just as
critically and carefully as the reasoning in an
argument. In the case of explanations we are
looking for the best. What makes one better
than another?
There are two useful tests for judging the
effectiveness of an explanation. One is to
question its scope; the other its simplicity. The

4.2 Explanation 139

‘scope’ of an explanation is just shorthand for
how much it can explain. Staying with ancient
history for a while longer, some serious defect
among Darius’s troops, on that fateful October
day, could explain wholly why Alexander
won, without requiring any extraordinary
brilliance from his enemy. Perhaps half the
Persian soldiers had dysentery; or there was a
mutiny. These are singular explanations
which, if true, would explain a singular event.
But if Persian weakness was the whole
explanation, it would be difficult to explain
how Alexander’s elite force won so many other
battles, across most of the then known world,
and against armies that frequently
outnumbered them. By most accounts he was
never defeated (at least until he reached India,
the limit of his empire). It is highly implausible
that each time there was some different,
unique reason for victory.
Far more plausible is that Alexander, and/or
his army, was immensely talented. We say that
this explanation has ‘scope’, because as well as
explaining the outcome at Issus, it explains
countless other victories. Nor does it require his
enemies to be defective: if Alexander was
superior that was enough. Someone who
wished to detract from his achievements might
come up with a different explanation for each
of his successes, always suggesting there was
some failure in his opponents. But the standard
historical claim, that he was an amazing
general and brilliant tactician, is a far simpler
account, as well as explaining much more.

Anomalies
Look again at Doc 4 in Chapter 4.1 (page 134)
about compensation claims for injuries. In the
second paragraph of the document we read
that out of all the different kinds of claim only
motor accident claims have risen; all other
categories fell. That is to say, motor accident
claims represent an anomaly: they ‘buck the
trend’. If a table were created to match the data
for the years in question, it would look like the
following.

140 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

Category 2000/1 2004/5 2007/8 Change
of claim
Clinical

10,890

8872 down
2018

Work
related

97,675

68,497 down
29,178

Motor
ALL
CLAIMS

403,892 551,899 up
148,007
735,931

732,750 down
3181

What would explain this? Why would one
category of claim have risen sharply (up by
37% in just four years) when all the others
declined? One obvious answer is that the
number of accidents had risen. If that was true
it would certainly be a plausible explanation,
and therefore a reasonable hypothesis.
The trouble is, it is not true. An official
government report in 2011 states that:

DOC B
. . . over the past two decades, the number
and severity of accidents has reduced.
Compared with the 1994–98 average, in 2010
there were fewer people killed or seriously
injured in road accidents (−49%) . . . and, the
slight casualty rate was lower (−39%).
Plainly the hypothesis is dead in the water. If
the number of accidents explained the
number of claims, the trend should have been
down as sharply as it was in other categories!

Activity
Suggest and assess one or more alternative
explanations for the anomaly shown in the
table above.

Commentary
There are various explanatory avenues
which can be explored. One is that people
really are faking or exaggerating injuries,
and in very large numbers. Another is that
although there were more accidents in the

past, people were not bothering to claim. Yet
another is that advertising by law firms and
others has encouraged people to claim who
would not have done so in the past, because
they would not have thought they had a
strong enough case. The trouble with all of
these is that we still have to explain why
claims are down in all but this one category
of motor accidents. So below are two
suggestions. (There may be other plausible
suggestions, besides these.)
Suggestion 1: To make a claim for an injury,
you have to be able to pin the blame on
someone else. In the case of a motor accident,
it is usually quite easy to prove whose fault it
is. (It may be very much harder to prove that a
doctor or employer was negligent.) So
claimants, or their lawyers, go for the easiest
type of claim. That’s a possibility.
Suggestion 2: The public are very aware of
the incidence of road accidents. Most people
have either seen one, experienced one, or
know someone who has had one. Because the
other categories of accident are less common,
there is less awareness of them, and so people
are less likely to think of making a claim for,
say, a workplace accident or poor medical
treatment.
There is a third possibility, of course, and
that is that the best explanation is a
combination of these factors. Jointly they may
be more plausible than either one on its own.

When in doubt
It is often quite easy to think up a plausible
explanation, or combination of plausible
explanations, for some observed fact. But it is
often very difficult to come to a confident
decision as to the best explanation. Moreover,
as we have just seen, even the most plausible
explanation, which seems to tick all the boxes,

can turn out to be factually untrue, thus ruling
it out.
Here is another interesting example. The
English word ‘posh’ is widely believed to be
an acronym, P.O.S.H, formed from the phrase:
Port Out, Starboard Home
This phrase, it is claimed, dates back to the
19th century, when people travelling to India
and the Far East would normally go by sea.
Wealthy European passengers, it was said,
demanded the more expensive cabins on the
port side of the ship travelling east (out), and
on the starboard when returning (home),
because they were cooler in the hottest part of
the day. The request was allegedly written on
the tickets of these passengers using the initials
only. Hence the word ‘posh’ entered the
language as a description for persons of wealth
and position who could afford such a luxury.
It is a very satisfying, pleasing theory, and
one which seems too plausible to be wrong.
However, there is not a shred of hard evidence
for it: tickets, for example, with the initial letters
on them. Most experts (lexicographers,
etymologists and so on) dispute it. There are
other explanations offered, but ultimately the
origins of the word are not known for certain. At
any rate the acronym hypothesis looks like
being a myth, sadly. But it serves as a useful
warning. The port-out-starboard-home
explanation is so plausible, and so pleasing, that
once people have heard it, they want it to be
true; and they are disappointed when they find
out that it is at best dubious, or worse still false.
The danger of believing what we want to
believe is a serious one. It is also one of the
reasons why critical thinking is so essential to
serious inquiry and the acquisition of
knowledge.

4.2 Explanation 141

Summary
• Explanations differ from arguments,
despite resemblances.
• There may be many possible explanations
for an outcome or event, though some are
more plausible than others.

• The best explanations are those that are
simple and that explain the most (have
the widest ‘scope’).
• Even the best explanations may be wrong:
they are, strictly speaking, hypotheses.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Which of the following short passages are
arguments, and which are explanations?
A	Icebergs are formed from glaciers
breaking off into huge chunks when
they reach the sea. The process is
known as ‘calving’. The glacier is
formed from snow, so it consists of
freshwater ice. The oceans consist
of brine (salt water), which has a
significantly lower freezing point than
fresh water. Therefore the sea
around icebergs remains in a liquid
state.
B	Ice is less dense than liquid water.
Consequently, ice forms on the
surface of lakes and ponds, instead
of sinking to the bottom.
C	In our ordinary everyday lives we use
the word ‘weight’ as if it meant the
same as ‘mass’. For example, we
‘weigh’ cooking ingredients in the
kitchen to tell us how much to use, not
to measure how much downward force
they exert on the scales. But there is a
distinction, and in science-teaching it
must be preserved and stressed. A
bag of flour on the surface of the Earth
has a different weight from the same
bag on the moon: here it is
approximately six times heavier. And in
an orbiting spacecraft we would say it

142 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

was weightless. But in all three
locations the amount of matter
remains the same, and this constant
amount is what is meant by its mass.
D	He did it for sure, because no one
else had the opportunity, the motive
or the training to do such a thing.
E	He did it because he needed the
money and because an opportunity
came his way.
2 Study the following information and then
answer the question that follows.
		Measurements were taken showing
the growth of 16 fir trees planted at
the same time but at different
altitudes on a hillside. The results
were recorded as shown in the graph.
Height of tree (m)
25

0

Altitude (m above sea level)

500

	Which of the following, if true, would be a
plausible explanation for the data recorded
in the graph? (There may be more than one.)
A	The fir trees planted at higher
altitudes tended to be shorter.
B	The higher up a hillside you go, the
poorer the soil tends to be.
C	Air temperature decreases with
altitude.
D	The higher a tree is planted, the
smaller its growth.
3 Re-examine the data in Doc 3 in
Chapter 4.1 (pages 131–2) and the
statistics discussed in this chapter from
Doc 4 (page 134). Suggest one or more
explanations for the widespread public
perception (shown by the charts) that
claims for injury are up, when official
statistics suggest that they are stable or
falling. Which is the best explanation, in
your view, and why?
4 (Harder task) Study the following short
article and complete the task below.
	In 1953, New Zealander Edmund
Hillary and the Nepalese Sherpa
Tenzing Norgay became the first
climbers to reach the summit of Mount
Everest and survive. That was then.
Now Sir Edmund has come out in
forthright criticism of some 40 climbers
who passed a dying man on the upper
slopes of Everest, and left him there to

die. Leaving a climber to his fate, just to
get to the summit of a mountain, was
unthinkable in Hillary’s day. Then
people climbed as members of large,
organised expeditions and knew each
other as friends and colleagues. Not
all of them were expecting, nor even
attempting, to reach the summit,
because it was the purpose of the
expedition just to get one or two
climbers to the top. It was a team effort,
and the credit was shared. Once the
mountain was beaten they could all go
home, satisfied that they had achieved
their shared goal. Today Everest is
besieged by swarms of individuals who
have paid thousands of pounds for
their one chance to make it, personally,
to the top. No wonder traditional
mountaineering morals have been
thrown to the 80-mile-an-hour winds.
	Is this passage an argument or an
explanation? (Give a reason or reasons for
your interpretation.)
• If it is an argument, identify its conclusion
and summarise the reasoning.
• If it is an explanation, state what
is being explained, and what the
explanation is.
Answers and comments are on page 324.

4.2 Explanation 143

4.3 Evidence
Practically anything can be evidence: a
footprint, a bloodstain, a written or spoken
statement, a statistic, a chance remark, an
email, some CCTV footage . . . the list could
run to pages.
There is good and bad evidence, just as there
are good and bad reasons (for a conclusion).
Judging whether or not a piece of evidence is
‘good’ depends on what it is being used as
evidence for. There is nothing good or bad
about a percentage of people saying they think
that false claims for personal injury are on the
increase. That is just raw data; a fact. It becomes
evidence when it is used as a reason for some
conclusion or verdict; or, to put it another way,
when something is inferred from it.
From this we can see that ‘evidence’ and
‘reason’ have some overlap in meaning.
However, there are subtle differences in the
way we use the terms in connection with
arguments. Recall once more the evidence
underlying the discussions in the previous two
chapters. The charts in Doc 3 in Chapter 4.1
(pages 131–2) could be cited as evidence for the
claim that:
[A] The vast majority of people believe that
more compensation payments are being
made than previously, and that more
false claims are being made.
But we could just as well say that the data in
the charts gave reasons for inferring [A]. It is
useful therefore to think of the numbers and
percentages reflected in the charts as raw
evidence (or raw data) which has been
extracted and processed into the statement,
[A]. [A] expresses the evidence in a form that
could be used as a reason (or premise) in an
argument. It also interprets the data, by

144 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

summarising the figures and connecting the
information from Charts 1 and 2.
Similarly, the figures in Doc 4 in Chapter 4.1
(page 134) are evidence for the claim that:
[B] Overall, more than 3000 fewer claims
were notified in 2007/8 than in 2000/1.
These two claims between them could then be
used to argue that, for example:
[C] The public perception of a dishonest
‘compensation culture’ is completely
mistaken.
Expressed as an argument:
[1] According to a report by the UK House
of Commons Constitutional Affairs
Committee the vast majority of British
people believe that more
compensation payments are being
made than previously. However, the
Compensation Recovery Unit reported
that over 3000 fewer claims were
made in 2007/8 than in 2000/1. The
widespread perception among the
British public that there is a growing,
and increasingly dishonest,
compensation culture is completely
mistaken.
Whether we want to call [A] and [B] ‘evidence’
for [C] or ‘reasons’ for [C] is a matter of
preference. They are evidence because they are
factual and statistical; they are reasons because
they are used in support of a conclusion. The
distinction is maintained when we say that
the reasons (or premises) in [1] are based on the
evidence provided by two sources. If [A] and
[B] are warranted by the evidence from those
sources, then [1] is well founded, and

strengthened. Hence the evaluation of an
argument like [1] ultimately comes down to
evaluating the evidence from which it draws
its premises. However good the reasoning may
be, if the evidence base is false, then the
argument is groundless.

Types of evidence
As stated at the start of the chapter, evidence
can take many forms. We have been looking at
one kind, namely statistical evidence.
Evidence can usefully be subdivided into two
categories: direct and indirect. Direct evidence,
as the name suggests, is first-hand, and
immediate. The most direct form of evidence
is what we experience with our own senses. If I
see something happening in front of my eyes,
that is direct evidence – for me, at least – that it
has taken place. Of course there are occasions
when we are mistaken or confused about what
we see or hear. Also we may misremember
some of what we have experienced when we
try to recall it later. But it remains true that
personal experience is the most direct contact
that we can have with the world and what
happens in it:

Testimony
‘Testimony’ means giving an account. A
witness statement is testimony. So long as it is
an account of something that the person has
witnessed or experienced at first hand, it too
counts as direct evidence. This is in contrast to
what is known as ‘hearsay evidence’. The
difference is clearly illustrated by the following
statements by two witnesses:
W1:	‘I know Janet Winters personally, and I
saw her punch the receptionist.’
W2:	‘I found the receptionist crying and she
said that Janet Winters had punched
her.’
It is obvious why this distinction matters. So
long as W1 is telling the truth, and is not
mistaken about what she saw, then Winters
did punch the receptionist. W2 on the other

hand may also be telling the truth about what
she was told, but the receptionist may not be
telling the truth about what happened. Of
course, either of the two witnesses might be
lying or mistaken. But in the second case there
are two ways in which the evidence may be
unreliable; in the first case only one.

Circumstantial evidence
By ‘circumstantial evidence’ we mean a fact, or
set of facts, which may be used to support a
conclusion or verdict indirectly. The facts
themselves – the circumstances – are not in
question. What is in question is what they
signify, or permit us to infer. Wherever an
inference is needed to get to the truth, the
evidence cannot be accepted as direct, even if
it is strong.
The classic example is the ‘smoking gun’. A
detective rushes into a room after hearing a
shot. He sees a body on the floor and a man
standing holding a gun with smoke still
coming from the barrel, indicating that it has
just been fired. The natural assumption is that
the man holding the gun is the murderer. The
detective testifies at the trial, reporting exactly
what he has seen. The suspect pleads not
guilty because, he says, he too heard the shot
and rushed into the room, and picked up the
still-smoking gun from the floor where it was
lying. The facts – the gun, the smoke, the man
holding the gun, the body on the floor – are
identical. The inferences are totally opposed.
‘A likely story!’ you may say of the suspect’s
explanation. But in the absence of any other
evidence, even the smoking gun is insufficient
for a conviction. It is (merely) circumstantial.

Corroboration
If, however, it were also known that the
suspect knew the dead man, that in the past
he had threatened to kill him, that he owed
the dead man money, and/or that he had
recently visited a gun shop, then his guilt
would be rather more probable. Each of these
on its own is another piece of circumstantial
evidence, but now the various items

4.3 Evidence 145

corroborate each other, and together provide
overwhelming evidence of guilt. In fact, the
smoking gun would then be virtual proof of
guilt; the other evidence – without the
smoking gun – would be very much weaker.
For that reason the expression ‘smoking gun’
has come to be a metaphor for evidence which
would finally settle a case. An investigation
may be getting nowhere through lack of
conclusive evidence, until the so-called
‘smoking gun’ turns up in the form of an
incriminating email, or revealing photograph,
or something of the kind. On its own it would
not be proof of the desired conclusion; but on
top of other corroborating facts it removes any
lingering doubt.

The student demo
Here is a fictional scenario which will
illustrate some of the concepts that we are
considering.
 n unpopular congressman, visiting a
A
university, was greeted by a large student
demonstration. As he was stepping out of his
car a raw egg thrown from the midst of the
crowd struck him on the side of the head and
broke, followed by a second and third. Soon
the politician was cowering under a hail of
missiles. As the crowd surged forward, he was
helped back into the car by security officers
and driven away.
  A 20-year-old sociology student, Amelia
Jackson, was arrested soon afterwards. She
had been seen in the crowd, and was caught
on surveillance cameras shouting angrily and
holding a large placard on a pole.
  Jackson was wearing a backpack containing
some provisions she said she had bought in
the market that morning. Among them was a
cardboard egg box with spaces for ten eggs,
but with only six eggs in it. She was taken into
custody for questioning and later charged with
assault, on the grounds that she had thrown
one or more objects at the congressman with
intent to injure or intimidate.

146 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

Activity
Discuss how strong this evidence is. On the
charge of assault, as described, would you
say Jackson was:
A guilty?
B probably guilty?
C probably not guilty?
D none of the above?

Commentary
The evidence available is entirely of the kind
we call circumstantial. However, as
circumstantial evidence goes, it looks fairly
damaging. There is no direct evidence that
Amelia Jackson did anything more than
attend the demo and express her feelings. No
one reports seeing her throw anything. But
together with that is the fact that she had
bought some eggs, and some appeared to be
missing from her bag. There is therefore an
accumulation of evidence. Firstly, she was
present at the scene; secondly, she was actively
demonstrating. Thirdly, eggs were among the
objects thrown at the congressman; and
fourthly – the nearest item to a ‘smoking
gun’ – there were empty compartments in the
egg box she was carrying. Do these corroborate
each other sufficiently to answer the question
above with A, B or C?
Not strictly. B is the nearest one could come
to incriminating Ms Jackson, but D is the
safest answer. Clearly there is insufficient
evidence for A: guilt would require evidence
that put the verdict beyond reasonable doubt.
However difficult it may seem to explain away
the empty places in the egg box, it is not
impossible that it had nothing to do with the
assault on the congressman. Plenty of other
people were throwing things: Amelia Jackson
may just have gone there to protest, angrily
perhaps, but not violently.
On the other hand it is very plausible, given
the circumstantial evidence, that Jackson was

guilty as charged. Because of that, C would be
a strange inference to make. She is no more
likely to be innocent than she is to be guilty.

Additional evidence
Amelia’s statement
When she was questioned, Amelia stated that
she lived in lodgings with two other students
and it was her turn to buy food and cook the
evening meal. She had bought six eggs so they
could have two each. She always bought eggs
at a market stall, where they were sold singly. It
was cheaper than buying ten. And she took
her own cardboard container so that they
would not break.

Stallholder’s statement
The owner of the stall where Amelia claimed
to have bought the eggs stated that he did not
recognise her when shown a photograph of
her. But he did make the following statement:
‘A lot of the students buy their eggs loose. If
they want a box they have to buy ten. I sell
loads of eggs that way every day.’

Flatmates’ statements
The two students with whom Amelia Jackson
shared an apartment were questioned
separately, and asked the same three
questions. Both gave the same answers:
Q: ‘Whose turn was it to cook that day?’
A: ‘Amelia’s.’
Q:	‘Do you know where Amelia was going
when she left the apartment that day?’
A: ‘Shopping. Then to the university.’
Q:	‘Was she planning to attend the
demonstration?’
A: ‘She didn’t mention it.’

Eyewitness account
58-year-old Rajinder Choudhury, a retired
headteacher, picked Amelia Jackson out of a
police line-up.* He said:
‘She’s the one. She was up ahead of me in
the crowd, right where the stuff all came from.

She jumped up and down, and did a high five
with the kid next to her. They were loving it.
Then she ducked down and picked something
up. The crowd rushed forward then and I lost
sight of her, but later I saw her get arrested,
and saw her face close up. It was her all right.
Later I heard the police were asking for
witnesses, so I came forward.’
*This is also known as an ‘identification
parade’: a number of people form a line and
the witness points out the one he or she
claims to have seen. If the suspect is identified
in this way, that is a form of direct evidence.

Activity
Discuss whether Amelia’s story is plausible
(or is it far-fetched?). Is it corroborated by any
of the other evidence and, if so, how
strongly? Is it seriously challenged by any of
the other evidence?

Commentary
It is a reasonably plausible story. Anyone who
has been a student, or knows students, would
agree that most of them tend to shop as
economically as they can, and if eggs can be
got more cheaply by taking a container and
buying them loose that makes sense. What is
more, if there are only three residents in the
flat (or apartment) then it also makes perfect
sense to buy multiples of three, and not ten.
This does not prove Amelia was innocent, but
it goes some way towards tipping the balance
back in her favour.
What is more, there is considerable
corroboration from both the stallholder and
the other students with whom she shares the
flat. Of course the flatmates might be
protecting her by answering as they do. They
were questioned separately, so the fact that they
gave exactly the same answers could mean they
were telling the truth. But it could also mean
they had prepared what they would say. As far
as the stallholder is concerned, he has no

4.3 Evidence 147

reason to say anything which would assist
Amelia. Evidently he doesn’t even know her.
You may have answered these questions
slightly differently, but you should have
registered that the circumstantial evidence
against Amelia now looks less threatening. It
fits just as well with her statement as it does
with the charge made against her. What has
always to be remembered with circumstantial
evidence is that if it can be explained away,
and the explanation is not far-fetched, no safe
conclusion can be drawn from it. An
evaluation of the evidence in this case would
not be nearly strong enough to justify a
conviction because any number of students, or
others, could have bought eggs, and could
have thrown them. Amelia is no longer in a
special position, but is one of many potential
suspects.
What about the ‘eyewitness’ statement?
Prima facie (meaning ‘on the face of it’) this
may seem to count against Amelia. However,
there are a number of weaknesses in Rajinder
Choudhury’s evidence that you should have
noted. Firstly, he did not see Amelia actually
throw anything; all he saw was her reaction.
The claim that she was enjoying what was

148 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

going on does not mean she actively took part
in it. Besides, his identification of Amelia is
practically worthless, for reasons which will be
discussed in the next chapter. You may also
have detected a possible tone of disapproval in
his statement, for Amelia or for student
demonstrators generally, which could be
interpreted as prejudice. He might want her to
be guilty, for one reason or another.

Summary
• Evidence takes many forms.
• The terms ‘evidence’ and ‘reason’ have
some overlap in meaning when used in the
context of arguments, and care must be
taken to use them appropriately.
• Evidence can be divided into two main
categories: direct and indirect (or
circumstantial). Circumstantial evidence
requires an inference to be made from the
facts to the conclusion.
• Evidence is strongest when it is
corroborated by other evidence.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Explain the difference between direct
and indirect evidence, giving illustrative
examples.
2 Imagine an investigation that turns on
whether a certain person, whom we’ll
call Mr White, visited another person,
Mr Green, one Saturday afternoon.
Mr Green is accusing Mr White of coming
to his house and assaulting him.
• A witness, Mrs Short, who lives in the
flat below Mr Green, says that she saw
a man answering White’s description
arriving by car at the house on that
Saturday. Later, when she went out to
the shop, she noticed the car again, and
thought she saw a parking ticket on the
windscreen.
• White says he was nowhere near
Green’s house, and produces a second
witness – a restaurant owner – who
testifies that White was in his restaurant
on the Saturday in question, and that
he stayed there all afternoon; and that
his car – a white Peugeot – was in the
restaurant car park the whole time.
White and the restaurant owner are old
friends and business partners.
• On the Sunday evening a third witness,
Mr Long, who lives opposite Green
but doesn’t know him or White or the
restaurant owner, comes forward and
states that he had seen a white Peugeot
parked outside his (Long’s) house the

previous day. He couldn’t be sure of the
time. The Sunday papers had printed
the story of White’s arrest, with a recent
photograph of him getting out of the
same white car at a friend’s wedding.
a How strong is the evidence provided
by Mrs Short? Does it count as
corroboration for Mr Green’s
accusation?
b How reliable is the restaurant owner
as a witness?
c What problems are there with
Mr Long’s evidence?
d Where would you look for further
evidence if you were investigating
this case?
3 (Harder task)
	‘Because of the compensation-claim
culture which has grown up in many
countries, advertising by lawyers and
conditional-fee agreements for
personal injury cases should not be
permitted.’
	Write a short evidence-based argument
supporting or challenging this
recommendation. Base your argument on
the evidence found in Docs 3 and 4 in
Chapter 4.1 (pages 131–2, 134), and give
an assessment of how strongly you think
this supports your conclusion.
Answers and comments are on page 324.

4.3 Evidence 149

4.4 Credibility
Whilst we are often unable to say with
confidence whether or not a claim is true, we
can make a judgement as to its credibility – how
justified we are in believing it. Credibility is
determined by two main factors. The first is
the plausibility of the claim itself. A wildly
improbable claim is less credible than an
unsurprising claim that fits in well with our
other beliefs. But, as we all discover from time
to time, something wildly improbable can on
occasions be true, and something highly
plausible can be false.
You may recall your role as the imaginary
time-traveller in Chapter 2.3, attempting to
convince a pre-Copernican population that the
Earth is not a flat dish but a large ball whirling
like a bucket on an invisible rope around a
distant nuclear furnace . . . You can imagine
their incredulity, given their other beliefs at
that time. The account of the solar system that
we now regard as fact was once so far beyond
people’s understanding as to be fantastical. If
the Earth were a ball, surely the people on the
sides and underneath would fall off! Isaac
Newton’s theory of universal gravity was not
yet formulated; and that too was treated with
derision when it was first announced.
Likewise some of today’s new scientific
theories seem improbable. Some of the
implications of quantum physics are more like
science fiction than science fact, especially to a
non-scientist. They don’t make ordinary sense,
any more than the solar system made ordinary
sense in the middle ages. The point of this is
that plausibility and justification do not
always correspond. Just because a claim seems
implausible we should not reject it out of
hand; nor should we accept a claim just
because it seems plausible. We need methods

150 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

of evaluating claims that are more critical than
merely relying on common sense.

The sources of claims
A second factor in judging the credibility of a
claim is its source. If the claim comes from a
trusted source, we have more grounds for
believing it than if we do not know where it
comes from. ‘Source’ in this context may be an
individual making an assertion; or it may be a
book, an article in a newspaper, a website; or it
may be a publisher. If you have found two
conflicting claims, one from a book published
by, say, Harvard University Press, the other
from a blog or tweet by some anonymous
individual, you would be likely to put your
trust in the former rather than the latter.
When deciding the extent to which we can
trust a source, we are looking for qualities such
as honesty and possession of knowledge.
There are other qualities, but those are
probably the most important. We need the
first for obvious reasons: we cannot trust a
known liar. But however honest an author
may be, we also have to be assured that he or
she is well informed. An honest mistake is no
more true than a deliberate lie, even though
one may be more excusable than the other.

Judging credibility
However, there is an obvious problem when it
comes to judging who to believe. It is no easier
than judging what to believe. Suppose
someone says to you: ‘Look, I’m telling you
the truth and I know what I’m talking about.’
This is just a claim like any other. To believe in
the source of the claim, you have to believe the
claim; and to believe the claim, you have to
believe the source. All you are doing is going
round in circles! What is needed is a set of

objective or independent criteria for judging a
source’s credibility.
What are the options? A good place to start is
reputation. Generally speaking, a witness or
claimant with a reputation for honesty, good
education, status in the community, and so on,
is a safer bet than someone with no such
reputation – or, worse still, a negative reputation.
A criminal with a record for fraud is less likely to
be believed than a law-abiding citizen with a
responsible job; and with good reason. It is
reasonable to believe that the probability of
obtaining the truth from a reputable source is
greater than it is from a disreputable one.
But, as stated, this is a generalisation. Under
certain circumstances it may be more
rewarding to consult a convicted criminal than
an ordinary citizen. If, for example, the subject
of inquiry is criminality, a person who has
committed crimes and knows the criminal
world is likely to be better informed than
someone who has no such experience. The risk
that the fraudster may lie is balanced by his or
her access to direct evidence. There is therefore
a second criterion that we can apply, namely
experience, or expertise. Ideally, of course, we
would hope to find sources that are reputable
and informed. So, for instance, a qualified
researcher who has made it her business to
investigate crime and criminal activity, study
statistics, talk to criminals and lawenforcement officers, and analyse and verify
her findings is arguably the best source of all.
Another point to be borne in mind about
reputation is that it may not be deserved. You
don’t have to read very many newspaper
articles before you come across a story of
someone who has held a highly respected
position but betrayed the trust that comes
with it. No one’s occupation or rank is a
guarantee of credibility. Every so often a
doctor, police officer, teacher or priest will be
discovered to have acted dishonestly or
stupidly. Conversely, there are countless
people with no special status in society who
are honest and clever. Reputation is a

guideline, but it is no more than that. Cast
your mind back to the eyewitness,
Mr Choudhury, in the previous chapter
(page 147). He was a retired headteacher, and
as such would have been expected to be
fair-minded and honest – especially towards
students. Yet his testimony was less than
wholly reliable. Maybe he was mistaken about
what he saw; maybe he was a supporter of the
visiting politician and took a dislike to Amelia
for showing pleasure at his ill-treatment.
Maybe none of these was the case, and he was
telling the unvarnished truth. The point is
that, although reputation is not irrelevant, on
its own it does not guarantee credibility. It is
one factor among many.
Choudhury’s evidence is interesting for
another reason. He identified Amelia. He
recognised her in a line-up as the person he had
seen throwing eggs. Here is his statement again:
‘She’s the one. She was up ahead of me in
the crowd, right where the stuff all came from.
She jumped up and down, and did a high five
with the kid next to her. They were loving it.
Then she ducked down and picked something
up. The crowd rushed forward then and I lost
sight of her, but later I saw her get arrested,
and saw her face close up. It was her all right.
Later I heard the police were asking for
witnesses, so I came forward.’

Activity
In legal terms Choudhury’s identification of
Amelia Jackson would be ‘inadmissible
evidence’. Why is this?
To put this another way: Why is Choudhury
not a credible witness?

Commentary
This question was partly answered in the
previous chapter. Choudhury did not claim to
have seen Amelia actually throw anything. He
just said (twice): ‘She’s the one.’ The most that
could be pinned on her was showing

4.4 Credibility 151

excitement, and bending down to pick
something up. What she picked up the witness
does not say, raising the question of how he
could be sure she picked anything up.
But there is another weakness in
Choudhury’s supposedly ‘eyewitness’
account. Whoever he saw in the crowd, it was
from behind; and he lost sight of her in the
crowd. He saw Amelia’s face close up only
when she was arrested. That was the face he
picked out of the line-up, but whether or not
the two women were the same we can’t be
sure. If Choudhury had not seen the arrest,
would he have identified Amelia in the
line-up? Again, we can’t be sure. The
credibility of Choudhury as a witness
ultimately comes down to his ability to see
what, and who, he claims to have seen.
A person’s ability to apprehend information
is thus another important factor in assessing
certain kinds of evidence. Imagine a witness
who claims to have overheard every detail of a
private conversation at another table in a busy
restaurant. The credibility of the claim could
be tested by asking her to sit at the same table
and repeat what she hears in similar, or more
favourable, circumstances. If she cannot hear
the words spoken in the test, she can hardly
claim to have heard every detail of the alleged
conversation. Her credibility as a witness
would come down to her ability to hear what
she says she heard, just as Rajinder
Choudhury’s comes down to his ability to see.

Neutrality
As noted at the end of the last chapter, there is
a possibility that Choudhury may have
formed a dislike for Amelia. He seems quite
eager to point the finger at her, even though
he has little hard evidence; and there is
something in the tone of his testimony which
hints at disapproval. If this were the case, it
would further undermine confidence in the
evidence. As well as being able and informed, a
reliable source should, as far as possible, be
neutral. Even the possibility of bias or
prejudice is enough to lessen a source’s

152 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

credibility. A newspaper that has known
political affiliations – as have many if not most
newspapers – may report an event, or give an
account of something, in a way that another
publication, with different affiliations, flatly
contradicts. A third commentator may give yet
another version of events, different from
either of the others. Any one of the three may
be correct, but without any way of judging
which one it is, we tend naturally, and
justifiably, to place most trust in the one that
has no ‘axe to grind’ – as the saying goes.
Neutrality, therefore, is another criterion for
assessing credibility.

Vested interest
One of the main reasons for doubting a
source’s neutrality is the discovery of a vested
interest. Vested interests may take many forms,
the most familiar being financial interest.
Take, for example, the following scenario: an
oil company wants to sink an exploratory well
in a region where there is some alleged risk of
environmental damage, and possible harm to
wildlife. Environmentalists have voiced strong
opposition; the oil company has hired a team
of ‘independent’ experts to assess the risks and
report on their findings. After some time the
team produce a statement that there is
practically no risk of contamination or other
damage, and the oil company gets the goahead. Then just before the drilling is due to
start two of the experts on the team are found
to have substantial shares in the oil industry.
Had the report been negative, they would
have lost a lot of money; as it stands, they will
make a lot of money instead.
Obviously the report is discredited, not
because it is necessarily false, but because of
the vested interest of two of its authors. This
is an extreme example, and a stereotypical
one. But it is illustrative. The general question
that we have to ask is therefore this: Does the
author of the claim have any reason to make
the claim, other than believing it to be the
truth? If the answer is yes, truth may not be
the author’s highest priority.

Corroboration
Each of the criteria that we have discussed
affects how we judge a claim. Yet none of
them, on its own, is sufficient to put a claim
beyond reasonable doubt. A claim is, by its
nature, uncertain, whoever has made it and
however plausible it may be. Corroboration
has been discussed at various points already,
so that it doesn’t need any further
explanation. Of all the criteria for assessing
credibility, it is perhaps the most potent. This
is hardly surprising, since it is not really a
single reason to believe a claim, but a
combination of reasons supporting and
endorsing each other.
The simplest form of corroboration is
agreement – though it must be agreement
between independent sources. If two or more
people make the same claim, or express the
same opinion, there is more reason to believe
it than if one person alone has made the
claim. It is crucial to add the word
‘independent’ here, because if it is found that
one person has influenced the others, the
added credibility is cancelled, for they are
effectively making a single, repeated claim
rather than several separate claims which
genuinely corroborate each other. You may
recall that in the previous chapter, the police
interviewed Amelia Jackson’s flatmates
separately. The fact that they still gave the
same answers added to the credibility of what
they said, but there was still the possibility
that they had conferred in advance, and
anticipated the questions. Indeed, if it is

known that they had conferred, that would
actually detract from their credibility, for it
would have to be explained why they had
conferred. If they were both simply telling the
truth, there would be no need to confer.
Corroboration is at its most potent when
there is agreement between different kinds of
evidence: for example, when statistical
evidence bears out what several independent
witnesses have said, and the circumstantial
evidence all points in the same direction. By
the same token, credibility is at its lowest
when there is a lack of corroboration, or
disagreement.

Summary
• In the absence of knowledge or certainty
about the truth of some portion of
evidence, we often have to rely on its
credibility.
• There are a number of criteria by which we
can judge credibility:
• the plausibility of the claim or claims
themselves
• the reputation, expertise, independence
and/or neutrality of the source
• the ability to have seen or perceived
what is being claimed
• the absence of vested interest (or motive
for saying one thing rather than another)
• corroboration by other evidence or from
other sources.

End-of-chapter assignment
This assignment can be completed
individually in writing, or as a group
discussion. (If you choose the second of
these, you should also make notes on what
you discussed, what decisions you came to

and, most importantly, why you reached those
decisions.)
Read the following passage carefully and
answer the questions that follow.

4.4 Credibility 153

PARTYTIME STAR ACCUSED
OF STEALING SONG
by Jan Ewbank, Arts and media correspondent
The superstar band
Partytime, and their lead
singer Magnolia, came under
more fire yesterday when it
was alleged that their
number one hit, If You Knew,
was originally written by an
unknown schoolteacher who
has never received a cent in
recognition.
The disclosure came hot
on the heels of criticism that
Magnolia has cashed in
big-time on her much
publicised, so-called charity
visits to developing countries
last year.
Now, if the latest
accusations are true, her
most famous song isn’t even
hers to sing. It appears that
the tune and chorus of If You
Knew were written ten years
ago by Sarah Berry. Sarah
had worked as a volunteer in
Africa before training as a
teacher. At college she met
Magnolia, then Maggie
Coleman.
‘The college did a charity
concert, and we were both in
it,’ she recalls. ‘I wrote a
song for it, and Maggie sang
it. I didn’t think it was all that
good, and never gave it

154 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

another thought afterwards.
It was only when I heard If
You Knew that I recognised
Maggie – and my song.’
Magnolia hotly denies the
claim. ‘I don’t even
remember anyone called
Sarah Berry,’ she says. ‘I
wrote If You Knew because I
was fed up of hearing rich
people whingeing when
there’s real hardship and
suffering in the world, like we
saw in Africa. Whoever she
is, she’s on the make. If
she’s got any proof she
ought to produce it – or
otherwise shut up.’
Partytime’s road manager
Paco added: ‘I was around
when Mags was writing it. It
came straight from her heart
after the tour. We write all
our own songs. People are
always coming out of the
woodwork accusing stars of
plagiarising – you know,
stealing their songs – once
they’re famous. This Berry
woman’s not the first and
won’t be the last.’
I visited Sarah in her
rented one-room apartment.
She dug out an old
photograph album and

scrapbook. In it was a
picture of a very young
Magnolia fronting a student
band. Under it were the
names of the group,
including ‘Maggie Coleman’.
There was also a handwritten
song with guitar chords, but
no tune. The chorus runs:
‘If you’d been to the places
I’ve been / And seen the
things that I’ve seen / You
wouldn’t be sighing that life
is so trying . . .’
Magnolia sings the chorus
of If You Knew in front of a
big screen showing
harrowing images. Her
chorus goes: ‘If you knew
the things that he’s seen /
Been to the places she’s
been / You’d have less to
say in your self-centred
way . . .’
When I confronted her with
this evidence, Magnolia said:
‘OK. Maybe this woman did
stand on the stage with me
once when we were at
college. Maybe we sang a
song together and some bits
of it stuck in my mind. That
doesn’t mean she wrote it,
whatever she pasted in her
scrapbook. It’s so long ago I

just don’t remember. As for
the tune, that was all mine,
and that’s what really counts.’
I next visited Professor Jon
Rudenko, who has been
called as an expert witness
in many high-profile
plagiarism wrangles. He told
me the chord sequence in

Sarah’s scrapbook would fit
the melody line of If You
Knew, although it would not
be impossible for the same
chords to fit two quite
different tunes. Asked to
estimate the odds against
two tunes having these
same chords by chance, he

1 Assuming it has been fairly represented
by the author, decide how credible is the
testimony given by each of the following:
•
•
•
•

Magnolia
Sarah Berry
Paco
Jon Rudenko.

	Base your assessments on the criteria
discussed in the chapter.
2 Identify and assess one or more pieces
of circumstantial evidence reported in the
article.
3 As a source of information, how reliable
do you consider Jan Ewbank’s article to
be in its reporting of the dispute? On
what grounds might someone question its
reliability?

said: ‘Upwards of twenty to
one. Not huge. It’s quite a
common sequence in
popular music.’
The jury is out on this one,
but whatever the verdict, it’s
another unwanted smear on
Magnolia’s already tarnished
reputation.

4 Imagine you were an informal jury
considering the evidence contained in
the article. What would your verdict be,
and why?
5 Assess the language used by the author
Jan Ewbank. Do you consider it to be a
fair and neutral report, or judgemental,
perhaps even biased? What evidence is
there, if any, of partiality towards one side
or the other?
Answers and comments are on page 324.

4.4 Credibility 155

4.5 Two case studies
to canteen
safe
secretary
manager

wall clock

Case One: Who’s telling the truth?
The diagram is a plan of the Management
Suite on the first floor of a firm’s premises.
Some money, in a brown envelope, has gone
missing from the safe, and an investigation is
underway.

General facts
T hree people are employed in the
Management Suite:
• the manager (Mrs Mann)
• the deputy manager (Mr Depp)
• the secretary (Rita).
 nly the manager knows the safe
O
combination.

Secretary’s evidence
‘I took the manager her morning coffee at
9.30. I noticed the safe was open and the
brown package was visible inside it. I took her
the mail at 10.00 and it was still open.
Immediately after that the manager left her
office and went straight along the corridor.
She was away about 20 minutes. Mr Depp,
the deputy manager, came out of his own
office and visited the manager’s office twice
that morning: once at about 9.45 and again
while the manager was away – I couldn’t say
the exact time.’

156 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

deputy manager

Manager’s evidence
‘I was away from the office for about 20
minutes. I didn’t lock the safe. I quite often
don’t lock it in the daytime, and nothing has
ever gone missing before. I am fairly certain
the deputy manager’s door was open and his
office was empty when I left, and it was still
empty when I returned. It was when I got back
that I realised the money was missing.’

Deputy manager’s evidence
‘I went into the manager’s office only once,
and she was there at her desk. At around
10.00 I went to the canteen because there
was a driver who had a problem to discuss –
an argument he had had with another worker.
It took over half an hour to sort out.’

Driver’s evidence
‘I was with Mr Depp in the canteen from
around 10.00. We talked for quite a long
time. I didn’t notice how long. We were sorting
out a personal problem.’

Activity
Following on from the discussions in the
previous chapter, assess the evidence given
above. Use it to ask yourself who, if anyone,
is not telling the truth.

Commentary
What we have here are two conflicting stories.
The secretary, Rita, claims that the deputy
manager went into the manager’s office twice,
once while the manager was in there and once
after she had left. The deputy manager, Mr
Depp, confirms that he went into her office
the first time, but denies the second. He claims
that during the time he was alleged to have
entered the manager’s office he was in the
canteen talking to a driver. At some time
during all this, some money went missing
from the safe. The secretary’s statement, if
true, casts considerable suspicion on Depp.
We will start by considering the witnesses
themselves. The three occupants of the
Management Suite are the manager, the
deputy manager and the secretary. The driver
is also a witness. Their ranking in the company
is probably in that order. So does this mean we
should rank the reliability of their evidence in
the same way: the manager’s more than the
deputy’s, the deputy’s more than the
secretary’s, the driver’s least of all?
In a word, no. In some cases there may be
more reason to trust a manager’s judgement
over a junior employee’s, on the grounds of
their respective qualifications and experience.
But we are not talking about judgement here,
only about honesty and accuracy. You may
argue that a manager has more to lose than a
secretary. But it would be quite unjustified to
assume that therefore the secretary is more
likely to be dishonest. It would be even more
unjustified to assume that the secretary was
less likely to be accurate in her statement. If
you looked carefully at the evidence you will
have seen that it is the secretary who is the
most exact in the information she gives, the
manager the most vague and imprecise. And it
should not be overlooked that the manager left
the safe unlocked, suggesting some absentmindedness or carelessness on her part.
What about the statements themselves: are
they equally plausible? On the face of it, yes.
There is nothing improbable about Depp going
into the manager’s office, or about his going to

talk to the driver. They are both normal,
unsurprising events in a typical office day, and
there is no obvious reason to believe one rather
than the other. It is only because they conflict
that we would question them at all. But since
they do conflict, we have to question them.

Corroboration
Where Depp’s statement scores over Rita’s is
that it gets some measure of corroboration
both from the driver and from the manager
herself. Rita has no witnesses or circumstances
to corroborate her counter-claim. However,
the corroborating evidence is not 100% solid.
The manager says that she is ‘fairly certain’ the
deputy manager’s door was open and his office
was empty when she left. The driver, too, gives
rather vague estimates: ‘I was with Mr Depp . . .
around 10.00. We talked for quite a long time.’
Conceivably, by this reckoning, the meeting
could have ended in time for Depp to go back
to his offices before Mrs Mann returned. So,
although the corroboration of two other
witnesses adds to Depp’s credibility, it does not
by any means remove all doubt about his
version of events.

Suppositional reasoning: ‘What if . . . ?’
So far it looks very much like a case of one
person’s word against another’s. But there is a
way forward. It involves a very useful
technique known as suppositional reasoning.
Suppositional reasoning typically starts with
phrases such as ‘Supposing . . .’ or ‘What if . . . ?’
For example, suppose that the secretary is
right: that Depp did go into the manager’s
office while she was away, which was also
during the period when the money went
missing. What would follow from this? It
would mean, of course, that Depp had an
opportunity to take the money. It would also
mean that he was lying when he said he was
away from the offices throughout the
manager’s absence, unless he had mysteriously
forgotten where he had been that morning.
And it is hard to understand why he would lie
unless he had something to hide. But would
he really have walked into the manager’s

4.5 Two case studies 157

office, taken the money and walked out again
with the secretary sitting at her desk, then
simply denied it in the hope that he would be
believed and not her?
If the secretary is right it also means that
the manager wrongly thought the deputy’s
office was empty when she passed it on two
occasions; and that the driver’s statement is
questionable. In other words, we would have
to disbelieve three people’s statements in order
to believe the secretary’s statement. For them
all to be wrong would be quite a coincidence.
For them all to be lying would require some
mysterious explanation.
So although the secretary’s story seems
credible enough in itself, when we subject it to
this kind of critical examination, it turns out
to have some unlikely consequences. A
consequence is something that follows from
something else. If we find that a certain claim,
or version of events, would have puzzling
consequences, that must throw some doubt
on the claim.
What if we accept the deputy manager’s
account? First of all it is consistent with what
two other witnesses are saying, and that has to
be in Depp’s favour, even if their statements
are a bit vague and uncertain. But, of course, it
means that Rita is lying. It also means that Rita
was alone in the Management Suite for about
20 minutes when the money went missing.
She therefore would have had a much better
opportunity than Depp to steal and hide the
money with no one around to see her. If she
did steal the money, she also had a motive for
trying to pin the blame on someone else.
If you compare the two suppositions,
Depp’s story has much more believable
consequences than Rita’s. This does not put it
beyond reasonable doubt that the secretary is
a thief and a liar, but it does make her story
harder to swallow.
Suppose the deputy manager planned the
theft with the driver. He waited for the
manager to leave her office, walked in there as
the secretary reported, took the money, and
later slipped out to give it to the driver and tell

158 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

him to say they had been in the canteen all
the time. So that the manager would think he
was not in his office he left the door open and
hid behind it as she passed. Is this all possible?
Yes, it’s possible. But it is unlikely. For a start,
how would Depp know when the manager
was going to leave? This, added to the fact that
the secretary would see him, makes such a
possibility too remote to take very seriously.
On balance of probabilities, it seems that
the secretary’s version of events is altogether
less credible than Depp’s. And that is the
most rational conclusion.

Case Two: Collision course
Two drivers – Ed Farr and Ray Crowe – collided
and spun off the track in heavy rain in the last
race of the season earlier today. Neither driver
was injured, but the incident put both cars out of
the race, leaving Crowe as World Champion for
the second year running. Before the race there
was just one point between the two drivers. If Farr
had finished the race ahead of Crowe, he would
have moved into first place and taken the title.
After the race an inquiry was called for into
allegations that Ray Crowe had intentionally
collided with his opponent’s car. The
following items of evidence were noted:
[1] 
Farr’s team manager reacted furiously by
claiming that Crowe had deliberately
swerved and forced their driver off the
track as he tried to overtake on a
notorious S-bend* known as the Slide.
‘It was no surprise, either,’ she added.
‘With Ed out of the race, Crowe knew he
had won the championship. Of course he
meant to do it.’
[2] A television camera team filmed Crowe
walking away from his wrecked car. He
appears to be smiling as he removes his
helmet. He says to reporters: ‘I hope
you’re not all going to blame this on me. I
just held my line**, and that is completely
within the rules.’ Later he added: ‘It was
all Ed’s fault. He could have killed us
both. It was a crazy place to try to
overtake. He has only himself to blame.’

[3] 
Ed Farr stated: ‘There was plenty of room
to get past if Crowe had held his line**. He
waited till I came level, then drove into me.’
[4] Today’s race winner Waleed Akram, who
was just behind the two cars at the time,
commented: ‘That’s motor racing. Ray had
earned his one point lead, and he was just
defending it. If it had been the other way
round, Ed would probably have done the
same. Everyone was expecting something
like this to happen.’ Asked if he had seen
Crowe swerve, he said: ‘Maybe not a
“swerve” exactly, but he could have
avoided the crash. Anyway, it stands to
reason that he would take Ed out of the
race if he got the chance. It’s not the first
time he’s done something like that.’
[5] 
Computer-generated images (see right)
were made from trackside cameras,
recording the positions of the cars just
before, and just as, they made contact.
[6] 
A race official, stationed on the bend,
reported: ‘There was a lot of spray as
the cars rounded the bend. Farr tried to
cut through on the inside. He was almost
past when the two cars touched. They
both spun and ended up on the verge
opposite. It is hard to tell, but to me it
just looked like an accident.’
[7] 
Journalist Gudrun Brecht added to the
controversy by reporting that she had been
at a party two days before the race and
that she had heard Crowe openly boasting
that he would ‘do anything necessary to
win the championship’. She wrote: ‘I know
Crowe well, and he makes no secret of his
determination to win, whatever it takes.’
[8] 
On record: Crowe was involved in two
similar controversies in previous
seasons, but on both occasions he was
cleared of any blame.

	* S-bend: a double bend in a road or
track, shaped like the letter S.
	** Holding your line: staying on your
chosen course, not swerving or cutting
across another driver. The rules of the
sport permit a driver to choose his line
through a bend, but not intentionally to
cause a collision.
Crowe
Farr

Race
official

Spectators’ area

28.07

.36

28.07

.47

Akram

28.08 .12

4.5 Two case studies 159

Answer each of the following questions and
compare your answer with the commentary
that follows. The questions are similar to those
set in Cambridge Thinking Skills Paper 2.

Activity
1 What is the team manager’s argument
for blaming Crowe for the incident? How
strong is her statement as evidence
against Crowe?

Commentary
The manager’s argument is based on what she
sees as Crowe’s motive. She is pointing out a
fact when she says that with Ed out of the race
Crowe would win the championship. But she
infers too much from it. Besides, she is
probably biased and sounds angry. As Ed Farr’s
manager she has a vested interest in the
outcome of the race. We say someone has a
vested interest in an outcome if they are likely
to benefit, financially or otherwise, if the
decision goes one way rather than the other.
Crowe, Farr and the manager all have an
obvious vested interest in the outcome of this
case. The other witnesses may or may not, but
there is no reason to think they have.
We don’t know if the manager actually
witnessed the incident first-hand, but even if
she did, it would be very hard to say that one
of the drivers had acted intentionally. She uses
the tell-tale phrase ‘of course’ to show that she
is assuming there was intention on Crowe’s
part because it would be to his advantage.
On its own this is not strong evidence. The
fact that someone stands to gain from some
act or other does not mean he or she will
commit that act. However, taken together
with other evidence, motive does add some
weight to the argument. Let’s put it this way: if
he didn’t have a motive, there would be much
less reason to think Crowe caused the crash
deliberately.

160 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

Activity
2 How reliable is Akram as a witness?
Consider what he has to say in the light of
other information and evidence available.
What impact should his statement have on
the outcome of the inquiry?

Commentary
Akram claims to be an eyewitness. However,
given what the race official says, and taking
into account his (Akram’s) position on the
track when the collision occurred, it is
doubtful whether he could have seen very
much. Like Farr’s manager, Akram bases his
assessment of what happened partly on
Crowe’s motives, but also on his past record.
He says ‘it stands to reason’ that Crowe did it
on purpose.
Unfortunately, it doesn’t really stand to
reason at all. Akram is unable to say that
Crowe actively ‘swerved’, yet he is prepared to
say he allowed the crash to happen. As a
professional racing driver, we can give Akram
credit for having the expertise to make such a
claim: he would know better than most people
if an accident could have been avoided or not.
But that is not to say that Crowe let it happen
intentionally. It could just have been
carelessness that caused it, or poor visibility.
Akram is not really in a position to make such
a judgement objectively.

Activity
3 How seriously can you take the evidence
provided by Gudrun Brecht?

Commentary
This evidence cannot be taken very seriously
at all. It is a classic case of hearsay evidence:
she ‘heard him’ boasting that he would do
anything necessary to win. We don’t have any
means of knowing if these were his exact

words, or if they were a journalist’s colourful
way of presenting them. Besides, even if they
were his exact words, they don’t really tell us
how far Crowe was prepared to go. Maybe he
meant he would try as hard as he could, but
would draw the line at risking his life and the
lives of others just to get the title.
Also, Gudrun claims, ‘I know Crowe well.’
She doesn’t say whether she likes or dislikes
him, but from the statement she makes it is
more likely that it is dislike. If she were fond of
him, she would hardly imply so strongly that
he was prepared to cheat. This makes her a less
reliable witness, since her neutrality is in
question. As sports-page gossip, what she says
is of some interest, but it ought not to count
for much as evidence of guilt in an official
inquiry.

Activity
4 Can you draw any conclusions from Ray
Crowe’s behaviour and his comments as
the camera team filmed him walking away
from the crash site?

Commentary
Crowe’s actual denial counts for very little, for
obvious reasons. If he had collided with Farr in
order to win the championship, he would be
just as likely to deny that it was intentional. It
could also be said that he was very quick to
deny it, doing so even before he had been
asked about it. On the other hand he may have
expected a hostile reaction from the media,
whether he was guilty or not, especially given
his apparent reputation.
The smile he appears to have as he takes off
his helmet may be a smile of satisfaction, or of
relief. It may even be a sarcastic smile, at seeing
the cameras and the television crew appear so
quickly. Smiles and other facial expressions are
often seized on by the media, and conclusions

drawn, but it would be wrong to interpret
Crowe’s apparent smile as a sign of guilt.
As for his own defence, which takes the
form of a pre-emptive attack on Farr, there
may be some justification for what he says. We
do not have a great deal to go on other than
the three computer-generated images of the
incident. These are the focus of the next
question.

Activity
5 What evidence can be found in the images
to support either of the two sides involved
in the dispute?

Commentary
Unlike almost all the evidence supplied by
witnesses, the images are hard evidence.
The saying ‘the camera never lies’ is often
challenged because nowadays almost anyone
can fake or ‘doctor’ a photograph. But it is still
true that the camera itself doesn’t lie: it is what
is done with the photographs afterwards that
can create deception. Anyway, we will assume
these images are an accurate reconstruction.
One way to approach this question is to
draw on the picture the line you think Crowe
would have chosen through the S-bend.
Obviously racing drivers like to steer through
bends by the fastest route, but if other cars are
in their way they have to go wide to get round
them. Remembering what the rules are, do
you think Crowe keeps strictly to a natural
line, or does he steer over into Farr’s path as
he comes level and so cause the collision?
Read again what the two drivers had to say
and what the race official saw, and, on the
strength of the pictures, decide whose story is
more believable. There is no right or wrong
answer to this: you have to draw your own
conclusions – and support them with the
evidence as you find it.

4.5 Two case studies 161

End-of-chapter assignments
1 On the basis of the evidence, can it be
concluded that Ray Crowe intentionally
collided with Farr? Give a short, reasoned
argument to support your answer.
2 The principal of a college is investigating
allegations that one of the students,
Corinne Blake, has cheated on multiple
occasions by: copying essays found
on the internet; asking friends
to write assignments for her; and
taking revision notes into an exam.
Corinne denies all the allegations and says
that the other students are accusing her
out of spite.
	The evidence in front of the principal
consists of three items, all messages:
A An anonymous email sent to the
principal. It reads: ‘I heard Corinne
Blake tell a friend she had
downloaded stuff off the internet and
got an A for it. They were both having
a good laugh about it. I thought you
should know.’
B A statement by a student saying that
she had been sitting behind Corinne
in an exam and watched her unfold a
page of notes and read it under the
desk before answering one of the

162 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

questions. She could not say what
the notes were about specifically.
C An intercepted text message from a
postgraduate st udent to Corinne’s
phone, saying: ‘Cant believe u r
bribing me. Wot kinda friend r u!!!
Write your own essay.’
	Rank these three items according to
the weight you would give them, stating
reasons for your assessments.
3 Comment critically on the following further
item of evidence given to the principal
investigating the allegations against Corinne
Blake. It is from a report by an educational
psychologist who interviewed Corinne:
	‘Miss Blake seemed agitated and
anxious. Her mannerisms and body
language were consistent with the
behaviour of someone who has
something to hide. When asked to
repeat the answers she had given to
some of the questions in the exam
she gave a number of incoherent
responses which suggested to me that
she had less knowledge of the subject
matter than her written answers
might have indicated. I do not believe
she could have given those answers
without external help of some sort.’

4.6 Critical thinking and science
Science is a highly disciplined form of critical
thinking. This is not surprising, since science is
a methodology that is reliant upon evidence, in
particular the evidence provided by
observation and experiment. Scientists make
observations and use them both to construct
and to test their theories. A scientific theory is
only as good as the evidence on which it is
based and the reasoning by which scientists
proceed in drawing their conclusions. All that
has been said about not leaping to conclusions,
or making unwarranted assumptions, applies
with particular relevance to science.
An observation in scientific terms is any fact
that can be verified by experience: for example,
evidence of the senses. It means more than just
visual data. If I suddenly sense the ground
trembling beneath my feet, or hear a rumbling
sound, or see a cup fall off a shelf, these are all
observations. I may not know what has caused
them: they may be indicative of an earthquake,
or just a heavy vehicle passing on the road, or a
controlled explosion in a nearby quarry.
Without further evidence I have no way of
inferring which, if any of them, is the correct
interpretation. But the experience itself – the
observation or sensation – remains the same
whatever its cause turns out to be.
Of course, people can be mistaken about
what they experience. We sometimes imagine
things, or misremember them. A reliable
scientific observation is therefore one which
cannot be dismissed easily. If many people
describe having had the same experience at the
same time, that is better evidence than one
person’s word. The term we use for this, as
introduced in Chapter 4.3, is ‘corroboration’.
Observations may be even more trustworthy if
they are detected and recorded by instruments
or sensors. Moreover, instruments can often
pick up information that human senses cannot

detect. They can make measurements of things
where humans can only estimate crudely. A
seismometer, for instance, is a device for
measuring earth tremors. It can give accurate
readings of movements far below the ground
that no human would notice or find significant.
Such readings are also ‘observations’.

If they are made accurately, these are facts; but
without accuracy they remain observations.
Their importance, scientifically, lies in the use
they can be put to as evidence for hypotheses
or predictions: for example, the causes of
earthquakes, or the risk of earthquakes in a
given region. For such purposes single
observations are rarely sufficient for
establishing conclusions. A large part of
scientific inquiry therefore involves the
analysis of collections of data to identify
patterns and correlations. Observations on
their own can be thought of as ‘raw’ data. To
function as evidence this raw data generally
has to be collated and interpreted, often in the
form of tables, graphs, reports and so on. A
critical question therefore arises as to whether
the processed data is fair and objective, or
whether it distorts the facts in one direction or
another. For instance, if the observation
concerns a sample of data, is it a representative
sample; or is it selective, exaggerated, biased or
misleading in any way?

4.6 Critical thinking and science 163

Good science is self-critical on just these
points. Not only do serious scientists, whose
aim is to discover the truth, check their own
findings with care and make every effort to
avoid reasoning errors, they check each
other’s work critically – a procedure known as
‘peer review’. Among the flaws that they look
for are two which have been discussed in
previous chapters: over-generalising from
limited examples, and confusing correlation
with cause. Both are easy errors to make.
Scientific method is not only of interest
within science. Any evidence-based reasoning
should be subjected to the same critical
standards as good science. We see scientific
methods being applied in subjects as diverse as
history, economics, sociology, psychology and
education, and many more.

An example: social networks
A field of study in which many modern
scientists have developed an interest is social
networking, especially with the coming of
phenomena such as Facebook, Twitter and so
on. Are these purely modern and human
inventions, or are they products of our natural
animal evolution? A key question is:
 o other animals, besides humans, form
D
‘social’ networks?

Activity
Take some time to think about and/or
discuss the question above. You do not need
any specialist knowledge to do this: it is an
open discussion, an exploration of ideas.
However, you should try to bring some
examples or evidence into the discussion.
You can use your own observations and
experiences as evidence – for example,
documentaries you have seen of animals in
the wild, and the way they behave. Think, too,
about what is meant by ‘social’ in this
context.

164 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

Commentary
As stated, this is an open discussion, so there is
no single right way to tackle it. The only
stipulation is that you should provide more
than just opinions. If all you say is that you
think animals do behave like humans and
form social networks, or that they don’t, this
would not be a critical response. Nor would it
be a scientific one. For the response to be
critical it would have to include reasons as
well as opinions and judgements. For it to be
scientific it would have to have some
evidential basis.
You are also asked to consider the meaning
of the term ‘social’. It’s all very well to say that
many animals live in groups – herds, shoals,
flocks, packs, colonies, etc. – but it is another
thing altogether to assert that these are social
groups. On the other hand it is unjustified to
claim that social groups belong only to
humans unless you can say what you consider
so special about human groups. Recognising
and defining key terms in a text is one of the
essential skills of any critical thinking
assignment. In this case it is very obvious that
the whole discussion turns on the definition of
a ‘social’ group. For example, compare a group
of friends or work colleagues, or a military unit,
with a herd of wildebeest or with a shoal of
fish. Clearly these are all groups of one kind or
another. But what, if any, are the key
differences? It is generally argued by zoologists
and others that herding is an instinct for
self-preservation by the individuals in the
group. If a wildebeest strays from the herd it is
more likely to be singled out for attack by a
predator. A lone animal is easy prey. The best
place for a wildebeest to be is near the middle
of the herd, so wildebeest have developed a
herd instinct for reasons of survival. There is
no obvious evidence that within the herd
wildebeest form relationships, and less still
that fish form relationships within the shoal. If
all that is involved in herding is each
individual’s instinct for self-preservation, there
is nothing ‘social’ about that.

A scientific study
A scientist who has undertaken extensive
research in this area is Robin Dunbar, Professor
of Evolutionary Anthropology at the
University of Oxford. His research focuses on
the evolution of sociality in the primates: the
order that includes apes, monkeys and
humans. He is particularly interested in the
structure and dynamics of human social
networks. The following extracts are from an
article published in New Scientist. Although
they all come from the same article, they are
presented here as four separate documents to
make them easier to refer to in the activity
which follows.

DOC A
 e tend to think of social networks as being
W
distinctly human. In fact, they occur wherever
animals live in ‘bonded’ groups – where
individuals gather together because of their
personal relationships rather than being forced
to by environmental factors such as a food
source or safe sleeping site. Bonded groups
are found among all primates and a few other
mammals . . . Such networks have benefits,
but they are also costly to maintain and are
only an option for the smartest of species.

DOC B
 onkeys and apes create and nurture social
M
relationships by grooming* each other. The
physical action of being groomed is rather like
massage and triggers the release of
chemicals called endorphins. This creates a
light euphoria that seems to make it possible
for animals that groom each other to build a
relationship based on friendship and trust.
The average time spent grooming by members
of a species correlates with the size of their
social group. Those, such as gibbons, which

typically live with only three or four others,
groom for 5 per cent of their day at most.
Baboons, meanwhile, live in groups of 50 or
more and can spend as much as 20 per cent
of their time grooming. However, as group size
and time spent grooming increases, this
social effort is concentrated on fewer and
fewer partners.
  Although we use grooming in intimate
relationships, the very intimacy of the activity
makes it ineffective as a tool for bonding our
large social groups. Instead, we have evolved
alternative ways to create the same endorphin
surge on a bigger scale. One of these is
laughter, another is communal music-making.
Language, too, plays an important role – not
only can we speak to many people at the
same time, we can also exchange information
about the state of our networks in a way that
other primates cannot. Gossip, I have argued,
is a very human form of grooming.
* ‘Grooming’ means tidying, removing dirt or
nits from fur, etc.

DOC C
Primates with a large social network have
bigger brains*
1000
Mean group size

Now that you have had a chance to discuss
and think about the issues and terms involved,
we can turn to a text which deals with the
subject on a more scientific level.

Humans
100
Monkeys
10

1

Apes

1

2
3
4
Neocortex ratio**

5

* In Doc C ‘bigger brains’ means more than just
brain volume. It is the proportion of the whole
brain that is associated with higher functions
like perception and communication. This is
called the ‘neocortex’. In humans the neocortex
is the part of the brain which enables language,
reasoning and conscious thought.
** Neocortex ratio = neocortex volume divided
by volume of the rest of brain

4.6 Critical thinking and science 165

DOC D

Time spent grooming (percentage)

The larger a primate’s group size, the longer
they spend grooming to cement bonds

20
15
10

5
0

gathering and a mere herd or pack. According
to Professor Dunbar, these bonded groups
occur among many animals, including all the
primates – apes, monkeys, humans, etc. – and
some other mammals too.
You are not asked to assess the evidence,
nor to evaluate the argument. To do that you
would need to have read more widely. But it is
clear that if the author is right in saying that
primates form groups that are bonded by
relationships, rather than mere environmental
factors, then there are grounds for the claim
that social groups are not distinctly human.

Activity
1

30

60
90 120
Group size

150

The four documents above – two textual and
two graphical – are typical of those used for
critical thinking questions in many
examinations. Once you are familiar with the
content, have a go at answering the questions
below, each of which is followed by a short
commentary, discussing the question and
suggesting a suitable answer (or answers).

Activity
1 In the paragraph marked Doc A, what
viewpoint is the author challenging, and
on what basic grounds does he make the
challenge?

Commentary
This is a very straightforward question. In
Doc A the author sets out his target for what
follows: the view that social networks are
distinctly human. He challenges this view by
claiming that social networks occur wherever
there are ‘bonded’ groups, defining bonding
as gathering together for more than just
physical reasons such as food and security.
This is the key difference between a social

166 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

2 Does the data in Doc C support the view
that a species’ average group size tells
us something about how ‘smart’ (i.e.
intelligent) it is?

Commentary
We will begin by saying something about the
data itself. Doc C is a scatter graph. Scatter
graphs are intended to show correlations. Here
the correlation being investigated is between
brain size (the horizontal axis) and average
group size (the vertical axis) in primates. ‘Brain
size’, as explained in the notes, is a shorthand
for something rather more complicated,
namely the amount of an animal’s brain that is
associated with higher levels of intelligence. It
is measured as a ratio, and obtained by
dividing the volume of the whole brain by the
volume of the neocortex. In humans the
neocortex is over four times the volume of the
rest of the brain, making the human brain the
‘biggest’ in the defined sense.
You may have noticed the somewhat
unusual scale that has been used on the graph,
especially on the vertical axis. The lowest band
shows group sizes between 1 and 10, the
second between 10 and 100. Mathematicians
among you will recognise this as a logarithmic
scale. It is a useful device when the range of

values is large, as it is in this case. Group sizes
start at about 3 and rise to around 150 (in
humans). With an ordinary scale the graph
would either have to be very tall, or the dots
would be packed so tightly together that they
would be difficult to tell apart.
Each dot or circle on the graph represents
one species. The pattern of the dots suggests
that the primates with bigger brains tend to
form larger groups. Most of the monkeys with
a brain size rated at less than 2 live in group
sizes smaller than 10. Those with brain sizes
between 2 and 3 form much larger groups:
anywhere between 10 and 100. With apes, too,
there is a correlation between brain and group
size, although their groups are slightly smaller
in relation to their brain size. Only humans
form groups of more than 100.
So, to get back to the main question, the
graph does show a general correlation between
brain size (as it is defined) and group size, both
in monkeys and in apes. Humans top the table
on both counts, and humans are very smart –
or so we tell ourselves. Therefore it could be
argued that group size is an indicator of
smartness: the larger the group, the greater
the intelligence. The author even offers an
explanation for this in Doc A. Social networks,
he says, are ‘costly’, and only the smartest
species could manage them. (By ‘cost’ he
probably means the time and effort that they
take up, which could be spent eating or
hunting instead.)
But there is a proviso. Yes, the data on group
size and brain size does tell us something
about the smartness or intelligence of a
species, but only if the groups in question are
‘bonded’ or ‘social’ groups. We know from the
earlier discussion that big herds, shoals and so
on don’t count as social groups. If they did
then there would be some animals (e.g. some
fish) that have very small brains but gather
together in groups of thousands. The graph on
its own, therefore, is selective. It relates only to

primates, which are already understood to be
at the smarter end of the scale of animal
intelligence. You may want to qualify your
answer by saying that the graph tells us
something about smartness and bonded
groups.
Another point you might make is that the
graph tells us only about the correlation
between group size and brain size (or neocortex
ratio to be precise.) Does this permit us to make
the further claim that animals which form
bigger groups are ‘smarter’? To put it another
way, is there an assumption that brain size
equals smartness? The problem is that we need
a definition of smartness that connects it with
brain size. Without that it would be jumping
to a conclusion to say that group size – even
bonded-group size – indicated intelligence.
Another point still that you could raise is
that although there is a general match
between group size and brain size, there are
some exceptions. As we observed earlier, the
three ape species apparently form smaller
groups than many monkeys with similar-sized
or even smaller brains. If apes are more
intelligent because their brains are larger, why
would they live in smaller groups? This at
least requires some explanation if we want to
make the connection between group size and
smartness.
So a good answer to a question like this is
more than simply yes or no. You may be
satisfied that the graph does tell us something
about the smartness of a species, but you
must be able to say why you reached this
judgement. You should also be prepared to
qualify your answer by adding reservations, or
acknowledging the assumptions that have to
be made, or further questions that have to be
answered. Likewise, if you decided that the
graph does not tell us anything about
smartness, you would need to give your
reasons, and to acknowledge what it does tell
us as well as what it does not.

4.6 Critical thinking and science 167

Activity
3 In the first sentence of Doc B, the author
claims that monkeys and apes develop
social relations by grooming each other.
How well does the rest of the document,
and the information in the second graph
(Doc D), support this claim?

Commentary
Firstly the author explains how grooming may
account for the building of relationships
within a group. It is known that naturally
produced chemicals called endorphins can
cause a pleasurable (euphoric) feeling in
humans. We know that among the ‘triggers’
which release endorphins is massage, which is
very similar to grooming. Laughter, musicmaking and so on have similar effects. If
people share these pleasurable experiences it
tends to bind them together as friends or
partners. It is a plausible hypothesis that
grooming has a similar effect among animals,
and results in bonding between individuals
within the group.
As we have seen several times in previous
chapters, being plausible is not enough to
make a hypothesis true. But it is enough to
make it worth investigating further. This
brings us to one of the key features of scientific
reasoning: the need to test hypotheses by
looking for further evidence which either
corroborates or disproves it. The methodology
is this: we suppose that the hypothesis is
correct and ask ourselves what else would be
true or probable as a consequence. In this case
the question would be: If the grooming theory
is right, what else would we expect to find?
One quite obvious expectation would be
that animals with large social groups would do
more grooming than those which form very
small groups. In Doc B Professor Dunbar
provides some data which suggests that this is
indeed the case: gibbons, which don’t form

168 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

large groups, spend much less time grooming
than baboons, which form groups of 50 or
more. Of course, two favourable examples do
not prove the theory correct, or even give it
much support. Doc D, on the other hand,
provides many such examples. And, as in Doc
B, the trend does support the hypothesis: time
spent grooming does show a tendency to
increase with group size. There are a few
‘outliers’, as they are called: one species which
grooms more than most but has a group size of
around 10; and the primate with the secondlargest group size grooms less than many
which live in smaller groups. (These are
‘outliers’ because the points on the graphs lie
furthest from the centre of the bunch.) You
can single out for yourself other examples
which are not typical. The question you must
ask is whether these anomalies are enough to
discredit the theory, or whether they can be
ignored, or explained (see Chapter 4.2,
pages 140–1).
You might also have picked up on the fact
which Professor Dunbar makes at the end of
the first paragraph of Doc B: ‘As group size and
time spent grooming increases, this social
effort is concentrated on fewer and fewer
partners.’ This may seem puzzling. It may even
seem to contradict the main idea that group
size goes with more grooming. For both
reasons, it calls out for an explanation, which
takes us on to our next and final question.

Activity
4 What explanation could be given for the
fact that in large groups grooming is
concentrated on fewer partners?

Commentary
There may be a number of plausible
explanations which you could give, so do not
be concerned if your answer is different from
the one here. It is a suggested answer, not the

only correct one. The clue is in human
behaviour, and is discussed in the second
paragraph of Doc B. Humans form large
groups, compared with most if not all other
primates – 150 on average (Doc C). Humans,
as we know, use physical grooming only in
very intimate relationships. With less intimate
acquaintances, Dunbar argues, grooming
takes more varied and more acceptable forms
such as laughing, singing and gossiping. The
explanation we are looking for may therefore
be that other more advanced primates, with
larger group sizes, and with brain sizes
approaching those of humans, also reserve
grooming for their most intimate partners.
Perhaps they too have other ways of

interacting with the wider group, as humans
do. That would account for the concentration
of grooming on small numbers of partners. If
this is the right explanation, it would also
support Dunbar’s claim that social groups are
not a purely human phenomenon.

Summary
• Scientists make observations and use
them both to construct and to test their
theories.
• Critical thinking has much in common with
scientific thinking.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Is there enough evidence in the extract you
have read to conclude that some animals
form social groups similar to those of
humans? Write a short reasoned case to
support your answer.
		 Questions in this form occur regularly in
Cambridge Thinking Skills Paper 2.

2 Find out more about the research of Robin
Dunbar. Identify one of his theories and
one or two items of evidence he gives in
support of it.

4.6 Critical thinking and science 169

4.7 Introducing longer arguments
We return now to arguments, but to longer
and more challenging texts than you have
been working on so far.
Start by reading the passage below. It is
followed by a number of questions that will

help you to engage critically with the article
and the reasoning in it. As in the past, you
should try answering the questions yourself
before reading the commentaries.

THRILL OF THE CHASE

that his speed is unsafe, he
will have pushed the pursued
driver well beyond his limit of
thieves escape, or the policy is competence.
In crowded cities across the
The police may say that if
ignored, and injuries or deaths
country there has been a
they were not allowed to
growing number of crashes as result. Not only is it obvious
a result of police officers
that this policy is ineffective – chase car thieves, this would
encourage more people to
pursuing stolen cars. Tragically, otherwise the crashes would
commit more of these crimes.
many of these high-speed
not have happened – but it is
Would it be so terrible if this
chases end in death, not just
also easy to understand why.
did happen? Surely saving
of the car thieves but also of
The police officers will find
lives is more important than
innocent bystanders or other
the chase exciting, since it is
preventing thefts of cars, and
road users. The police should
a break from routine, and
be prohibited from carrying out gives them the chance to feel the police would be more
profitably employed trying to
these car chases. If someone that they really are hunting
dies as a result of police
criminals. Once the adrenaline catch serious criminals rather
than bored, disadvantaged
activity and the fatal weapon is is flowing, their judgement as
a gun, there is rightly a huge
to whether their speed is safe young men who steal cars for
excitement. In any case, there
outcry. But if it is a car, that
will become unreliable. Car
seems to be accepted as an
chases can be huge fun for all are other ways of stopping
stolen cars. For example, a
unavoidable accident.
the participants.
certain device has been
The police say that they are
Moreover, those police
developed which can be
not putting the public at
officers who are trusted to
unnecessary risk, because
undertake car chases are the thrown onto the road surface
their policy is to stop the
most experienced drivers who in front of the stolen car in
order to bring it safely to a
chase when the speed
have had special training in
halt. And sometimes the
becomes too high for safety.
driving safely at high speed.
chases are unsuccessful – the
This merely emphasises the
The car thieves, however, are
stupidity of carrying out the
almost all young men with very car thief succeeds in evading
chases. Either the policy is
little driving experience. By the the police, abandons the car,
and escapes.
adhered to, and the car
time the police driver judges

170 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

Activity
1 What is the main conclusion of the
passage?

Commentary
The conclusion is in the first paragraph, and
you should have had no problem identifying
it: ‘The police should be prohibited from
carrying out these car chases.’ The two
sentences before the conclusion are
introductory and explanatory.

Activity
2 Identify three or four of the main reasons
which the passage offers to support the
conclusion that car chases should be
banned.

Commentary
You could have chosen any or all of the
following as the main reasons offered in
support of the conclusion:
• Car chases have led to the deaths of car
thieves and innocent bystanders.
• The police drivers’ judgement as to
whether their speed is safe will become
unreliable.
• By the time the police driver judges that
his speed is unsafe, he will have pushed
the pursued driver well beyond his limit
of competence.
• Saving lives is more important than
preventing thefts of cars.
• The police would be more profitably
employed trying to catch serious
criminals.
• There are other (safe) ways of stopping
stolen cars.
• Sometimes the car chases are unsuccessful.

Note that these reasons have simply been
extracted from the passage and listed. A list
like this doesn’t show how the argument is
structured, or how the reasons are grouped
together to form sub-arguments within the
whole argument.
Nor does the list show all the claims that are
made in the passage. For example, it doesn’t
include the claim that car chases can be fun
(paragraph 3). This is because it is not one of the
main reasons. Yes, it contributes to the argument
by helping to explain why police drivers may
drive too fast for safety, namely because they
enjoy it. But by itself it does not provide any
grounds for believing that car chases should be
banned. We would therefore classify the claim
about car chases being fun as an indirect reason,
leading to an intermediate conclusion, rather
than directly to the main conclusion.
Similarly, the last half-sentence, after the
dash, explains in what sense car chases are
sometimes unsuccessful. It is the claim that
they are sometimes unsuccessful (as well as
dangerous and time-wasting) which is a main
premise here and therefore makes it into the list.
Finally, of course, there are some claims
that are not reasons at all, or conclusions, but
have other functions in the passage. The first
sentence of paragraph 2 is a good example. It
offers no support at all for the conclusion,
either directly or indirectly. Its role is to set up
an objection that an opponent – in this case
the police – might wish to make. The objection
is that they, the police, have a policy of
stopping the chase if it becomes too fast for
safety, and that therefore they are not putting
the public at unnecessary risk. The author
claims that the policy is both ineffective and
stupid, and devotes the middle three
paragraphs of the passage to supporting these
claims. The next pair of questions focuses on
this section of the argument.

4.7 Introducing longer arguments 171

Activity

Activity

3 What grounds does the author have for
saying that the police policy ‘emphasises
the stupidity’ of car chases?
What two explanations does the passage
offer as to why the policy is ‘ineffective’?

4 Are there any assumptions that are not
stated in the passage but that the author
appears to be making in connection with
the claims made in paragraph 2?

Commentary
Commentary
The author uses quite an ingenious piece of
reasoning to criticise the policy. She considers
the possible outcomes. Firstly, she considers
what will happen if the policy is observed
(‘adhered to’) by the police. Then she
considers what will happen if it is ignored. If it
is observed, says the author, the thieves will
get away, presumably because the police will
have to give up before the thieves do. If it is
ignored, then accidents will continue to
happen, just as they have happened in the
past. And since they have happened in the
past, it is obvious that the policy does not
work as it is claimed to.
The question also asked you to identify the
explanations that are offered for the policy’s
failure to work. There are two of these. The
first is that police officers find the chase
exciting, and that this affects their judgement
about safety. The second is that whereas the
police driver is likely to be competent to drive
safely at high speed, the pursued driver has
little driving experience, so that the officer
will overestimate what is a safe speed for the
car thief. The author concludes that not only
is the policy ineffective, but that it is ‘easy to
understand why’.
How successful is this reasoning? (This was
not part of the question you were asked, but
it is part of the next one.) Like all arguments,
its success depends not just on what is stated
but also on what is assumed, and whether the
assumptions that the argument rests on are
warranted assumptions.

172 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

Yes, there are. The most significant assumption
is that it is not possible for the police officer to
catch the thieves without driving too fast for
safety. The author claims that if the policy is
adhered to, the thieves will get away; and if it
isn’t, accidents will result. In so doing she
overlooks a third possibility: that some police
drivers may be sufficiently skilled to remain
within safety limits and to keep up with some
of the thieves. She paints it as a so-called
‘no-win situation’, but is it? Without some
statistical evidence it is hard to know what
grounds the author has for predicting that the
policy will inevitably fail one way or the other.
There is another assumption, too, although
it is a lot less obvious. It is that if the stolen car
were not being pursued, its driver would not
drive unsafely anyway. The author wants to
persuade the reader that there is no overall
benefit to the public from chasing car thieves,
only increased danger. That implies that the
danger to the public comes only, or mainly,
when car thieves are pursued. If they were left
to drive around the streets unpursued, can we
be sure there would not be just as many
accidents – or even more, if would-be thieves
get the idea they won’t be chased and arrested?
Again, the author is making a prediction on
the basis of no hard evidence. Her prediction
may be right – the policy of pursuing cars may
prove ineffective – but it doesn’t follow from
the reasons she gives unless she makes these
two major, and questionable, assumptions.

‘Restricting the options’
What we have exposed in the above discussion
is a very common reasoning error: one to add
to your catalogue. It is sometimes called
‘restricting the options’, because it consists in
claiming or implying that there are fewer
possibilities to consider than there really are.
This is easier to understand by seeing an
example of an argument from a different
source that commits this error:
[1] 	When you go into business either you
can adopt ethical practices or you can
make a profit. Herbco has declared itself
to be an ethical company, so if you want
to see good returns, you really need to
invest your money somewhere else.
On the face of it this looks like sound advice,
given the two premises. If it really is true that
you must choose between ethics and profit –
and it often is – then surely it is not a good
plan to invest money in an ethical company if
your aim is just to get a good return.
But, like the author of ‘Thrill of the chase’,
the speaker here is restricting the options to
just two, and assuming that there are no
others. Yes, you can choose between ethics and
making a profit, as the first premise says. But
you don’t have to choose between them unless
they are the only choices. By drawing the
conclusion that it does, argument [1] clearly
makes the assumption that it is a straight
choice between ethics and profit with no other
options. But it is not a straight choice: Herbco
could operate ethically and make a profit – for
example, if it became very fashionable to buy
goods produced by ethical companies.
The same sort of restriction is imposed in
considering the police driver’s options. The
driver can either obey the rules and let the
thief escape, or drive dangerously and capture
him. The possibility of obeying the rules and
catching the thief is not openly or fairly
considered.
Of course, you may happen to agree with the
author, even after recognising that she has

restricted the options. Like her, you may feel
that there really are only two possible outcomes
of the policy because there is no way of partly
observing the rules: either you do or you don’t.
And if you do, you have to let thieves escape,
which makes it pointless, and if you don’t, you
put the public at risk. By saying that an
argument rests on an assumption that there are
only two options, you are not necessarily saying
that it is unsound. If you consider the
assumption to be a fair one, then you can still
accept the argument and the conclusion.
So in the end there is still room for
agreement or disagreement, and scope for
further argument. It is a piece of further
argument that we turn to in the next question.
Note: when only two options are involved,
the above fallacy is sometimes called ‘false
dilemma’ or ‘false dichotomy’. (A dichotomy
is a division into two.)

Activity
Here is a point someone might raise on
reading ‘Thrill of the chase’:
 ‘Some of those who steal cars are
attempting to escape after committing
other serious crimes.’
Does this statement, if true, strengthen or
weaken the argument (or neither)? Give your
reasons.

Commentary
If someone said this in response to the
argument it would be natural to think it was
meant as an objection. It would be hard to
interpret it as supporting the argument, or
even as a neutral remark. Almost certainly it is
picking up on the author’s claim that: ‘saving
lives is more important than preventing thefts
of cars, and the police would be more
profitably employed trying to catch serious
criminals rather than bored, disadvantaged
young men who steal cars for excitement’.

4.7 Introducing longer arguments 173

In fact, the comment suggests that there is
a fault in the argument very similar to the
one we were discussing in the last question.
The author is assuming that there is a choice
between using police time to catch ‘serious’
criminals (whatever that means) and chasing
‘bored young men’. And there is a further
assumption that the latter are not serious
criminals. Again, we have to ask whether this
is a straight choice. The objection implies
that it is not, suggesting that there may be
some circumstances in which the car thief is a
serious criminal: for example, an armed
robber using a stolen car as a getaway vehicle.
As this possibility could be used to support
a conclusion that car chases should not be
banned altogether, it does to some extent
undermine the argument. However, it is not a
particularly difficult challenge to counter.
There are several ways this could be
approached. One is to say that the argument
is mainly directed at the large number of
cases in which the car theft itself is the only
crime. Car theft in connection with more
serious crimes such as murder or armed
robbery is rare and a special case, and could
be given special treatment without altering
the author’s general conclusion. Another,
more robust, reply would be that it doesn’t
matter how serious a crime is, catching the
criminal is never a good enough reason for
endangering the lives of innocent bystanders.
And finally the author can fall back on her
last-but-one premise: that you don’t have to
chase stolen cars, because there are other,
safer ways of stopping them.
Taken together, these responses to the
statement take most of the sting out of it. The
best assessment is therefore that if it weakens
the argument at all, it does so only slightly.

Using analogy
The last feature of this argument we are going
to examine is found in the first paragraph. It
is called arguing from analogy. Used well, it is a
very powerful tool. However, it is often used

174 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

badly or misleadingly, in which case it creates
a flaw in the reasoning, not a strength.
An analogy is a comparison. For example,
suppose you are arguing about what it is to be
a good leader, and how a good leader should
behave towards the people he or she has been
chosen to lead. One approach is to compare
the nation-state to a family, so that being a
ruler is analogous to being the head of a
family. If we accept this broad analogy we can
draw certain conclusions from it. An obvious
conclusion is that a ruler does not merely
have authority over the citizens but also a
duty of care towards them, just as a parent
has a duty of care towards his or her children.
If you want to say that an authoritarian but
uncaring parent is a bad parent (as most
people would) you are also committed to
saying that – by analogy – a purely
authoritarian ruler is a bad ruler. This kind of
reasoning is what is meant by argument from
analogy. It stands or falls on whether the
analogy is a fair one or an unfair one; and
that is what you as the critic have to decide.
But what is a ‘fair’ analogy? Obviously the
two things being compared are not exactly
the same, or you wouldn’t need to draw the
comparison. What an analogy does is to say
that two things are alike in certain relevant
respects. In the analogy above, the role of a
ruler is being likened to that of the head of a
family. There is a difference in that the
citizens are not the ruler’s own offspring or
close relatives, and of course there is a
difference in the size of the ‘family’. But by
using the analogy for the argument you are
not suggesting that the two roles are exactly
the same: only that they are sufficiently
alike – in the relevant respect – for the same
kind of duties and responsibilities to apply.
Most people would probably agree that the
nation–family analogy was a fair one if it were
used to support the conclusion that rulers
should not treat their citizens more brutally or
unjustly than they would their own children;
or simply that rulers have a ‘duty of care’

similar in certain respects to that of a parent.
If, on the other hand, the argument was that a
good ruler has to treat every citizen like his or
her own child, that would be taking the
analogy too far. In other words the fairness of
an analogy depends upon the use it is put to
in a particular argument.

Activity
An analogy is used in the first paragraph of
‘Thrill of the chase’. Identify the two things
that are being compared; and assess how
successful the analogy is in the context of
the argument.

Commentary
The comparison is between deaths resulting
from the police action of chasing stolen cars
and deaths resulting from police action
involving a gun. In order to give support to the
argument, the analogy has to compare things
that really are similar in ways that are relevant.
It also has to be true that there should be an
outcry if police action resulted in deaths from
firing a gun. The author clearly assumes that
there should by using the word ‘rightly’ when
drawing the analogy.
The similarities are fairly obvious. Guns
and car chases both kill. And if things go
wrong, both of them kill innocent bystanders
as well as criminals and suspects. It is often
said that a car is potentially a lethal weapon
and this is very much what the analogy is
saying here. Is it a fair comparison? As far as
the consequences go, yes, it seems very fair.
Why should we disapprove of a shooting
accident, but shrug our shoulders at a driving
accident, just because the ‘weapons’ used are
different?
But there are dissimilarities, too, and they
cannot all be brushed aside. A gun is designed
to be a weapon, whereas a car is not. Also,

when a gun is fired by a police officer it is with
the intent to kill or wound someone, whereas
generally the driver of a pursuit vehicle kills by
accident. Of course, this doesn’t make an
accidental death arising from a police car
chase any less painful for the bereaved
relatives. But it does explain the attitude to
which the author is objecting: the attitude
that ‘if (the weapon) is a car, that seems to be
accepted as an unavoidable accident’.
Does the analogy successfully support the
argument? Not entirely. Although the
similarities seem quite striking, they are
undermined by significant differences. A gun
is primarily a weapon; a car is primarily a
transport vehicle, and becomes a weapon only
if it is misused. Also, if you place too much
weight on this analogy, where do you draw
the line? Do you want to say that any police
action that results in tragic accidents should
be banned, whatever the instrument – batons,
riot shields, water hoses, tear gas . . .? If we
completely disarm the police of all ‘potentially
lethal weapons’, how can we ask them to
protect the public from criminals who could
harm them? It is a genuine dilemma, and it
cannot be solved by judging all actions by
their sometimes-tragic consequences.

Summary
• ‘Thrill of the chase’ is not a bad argument.
It tackles a difficult and controversial
subject and draws a conclusion that many
people will have sympathy with. But it does
not have all the answers. In this unit we
have looked at the strengths and some of
the weak points in the reasoning, so that
an informed and considered judgement
can be made as to whether its conclusions
are acceptable. Or you may decide that
there is more to be investigated and more
argument to be had.

4.7 Introducing longer arguments 175

End-of-chapter assignments
1 In paragraph 3 of ‘Thrill of the chase’ it is
observed that car chases can be fun for
all the participants. In paragraph 5 it is
implied that car thieves are predominantly
bored young men looking for excitement.
How could these claims be developed
to counter the argument of some police
officers that banning police pursuit would
lead to an increase in car theft?

176 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

2 Find an example of an argument based on
analogy – or write one yourself. Critically
examine it, like we examined the example
in the ‘Thrill of the chase’ passage, and
decide whether or not it does its job
successfully.
Answers and comments are on page 325.

4.8 Applying analysis skills
In the previous chapter you looked at a longer
piece of text and answered some searching
critical questions. Some of them were about
analysis, some about evaluation and some
about objections and further argument. In
this chapter, and in the next two, we will
examine two new articles, applying each of
these skills in turn. We start, in this chapter,
with analysis.
The text on the next page is an argument
about criminals who become celebrities. Read
it through twice, once for general meaning,
then again for more detail. Then answer the
following questions.

Activity
1 What is the main conclusion of the
passage?

Commentary
Although arguments like this are longer and
more involved than the ones you have been
used to, the strategy for analysing or
interpreting them is much the same as it was
for the short, illustrative examples in Unit 2.
When seeking the main conclusion, first look
for a likely candidate – perhaps some
recommendation or prediction or verdict –
and ask yourself if other parts of the argument
are reasons for making such a claim, or not. If
not, look for another candidate.
It should be fairly obvious what this passage,
‘Time to get tough’, is leading up to. It claims
that the legal principle of no profit from crime
should be extended to cover celebrity criminals.
And it claims that, on principle, income from
criminal celebrity should be confiscated. These
two claims between them summarise the
author’s main contention. If you had to pick

one as the last word, it would be the second, the
recommendation to confiscate income, since
this follows from the more general claim that
the law should be extended.
You might have been tempted by the last
sentence of paragraph 3, which claims that
there is no real difference between direct and
indirect profit from crime. This certainly is a
conclusion, as the word ‘therefore’ would
suggest, and it follows from the reasoning in
the third paragraph. But establishing this
conclusion is only one step in the argument,
and it is not the final step. It is therefore an
intermediate conclusion, not the main one.
Best answer: ‘If the principle of not
benefiting from crime means anything, all
income, direct or otherwise, should be
confiscated from anyone whose criminal past
has helped them to get rich’; or the same
statement in your own words.

Activity
2 Two objections, or counter-arguments, are
considered in the passage. What are they?
Why does the author raise them? How
does he deal with them?

Commentary
The counter-arguments are contained in the
third and fourth paragraphs. They are
recognisable from the use of the words
‘protest’ and ‘object(ed)’, but also from the
obvious fact that they challenge the author’s
conclusions.
Why should an author include in a text a
challenge to his own conclusions? Doesn’t
that weaken the argument? No, it strengthens
it, because it shows that the author has an
answer to the challenge. Imagine you were in a

4.8 Applying analysis skills 177

TIME TO GET TOUGH

also have rights. One of those
must surely be the right not to
previous crimes, but that it is
see the very person who has
It is an established legal
robbed or assaulted them, or
principle, in almost all parts of a legitimate reward for their
redirected talent, and for the
murdered someone in their
the world, that convicted
audiences they attract. But
family, strutting about enjoying
criminals should not profit
this is an unacceptable
celebrity status and a megafrom their crimes, even after
argument. Firstly, the
buck income. Moreover,
serving their sentences.
producers and others take a
victims of crime do not get the
Obviously offenders such as
chance to become chat-show
fraudsters and armed robbers big cut of the profit, so
obviously they would say
hosts, or star in crime movies,
cannot be allowed to retire
because being a victim of
comfortably on the money they something of that sort.
Secondly, a notorious gangster crime is not seen as
made fraudulently or by
needs no talent to attract an
glamorous.
robbing banks.
audience: their reputation is
If the principle of not
But the law does not go far
benefiting from crime means
enough. It should also apply to enough. Therefore, whether
the income is direct or
anything, all income, direct or
the growing number of
indirect, it is still profit from
otherwise, should be
notorious criminals who
crime.
confiscated from anyone
achieve celebrity status after
It is often objected that once whose criminal past has
their release from jail. Exa person has served a
helped them to get rich. After
convicts who become
sentence, they should be
all, no one is forced to become
television presenters, film
entitled to start again with a
a big-time crook. It is a choice
stars or bestselling authors
clean sheet; that barring them the individual makes. Once
often make big money from
from celebrity careers is unjust they have made that choice the
their glitzy new careers. But
and infringes their rights. This door to respectable wealth
they would never have had
is typical of the views
should be permanently closed.
such careers if it weren’t for
expressed by woolly-minded
It’s the price they pay. If
their crooked past.
liberals, who are endlessly
would-be criminals know they
The producers, agents and
can never profit in any way from
publishers who sign the deals ready to defend the rights of
with celebrity criminals protest thugs and murderers without a their wickedness, they might
think twice before turning to
that the money does not come thought for their victims. They
forget that the victims of crime crime in the first place.
directly from a convict’s

debate and it is your turn to speak. Even before
the opposition have their chance to raise an
objection, you have anticipated it and
responded to it. It is sometimes called a
pre-emptive move: dealing with a point before
it has been made.
Take the first ‘protest’ that producers and
others allegedly make. The objection is that
the money ex-convicts make from acting,
writing, presenting and so on is due to their

178 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

talent and comes only indirectly from crime,
not directly like the money from fraud or
bank raids. The reply, not surprisingly, is
that this is unacceptable. Two reasons are
given: firstly, that the producers ‘would say
something like that, because they take a cut
of the profits; secondly, that gangsters need
no talent: their criminal reputations are
enough to draw an audience. From this
the author concludes that whether the

income is direct or indirect, it is still profit
from crime.
You may already have noticed that
paragraph 3 is itself a complete argument: a
sub-argument within the overall argument.
Here it is in standard form:
Target: the counter-argument
But . . .
R1 Producers would say something like that
because they take some of the profit.
R2 Notorious gangsters need no talent;
their reputation is enough.
IC

Indirect income is still profit from crime.

C

This (counter-argument) is unacceptable.

The next objection that the author anticipates
is that ex-convicts have the right to start again.
It is dismissed as a ‘woolly-minded’ argument,
and as one that ignores victims’ rights and
feelings. It also points out an unfairness in
that criminals gain from their crimes whereas
victims have no such opportunities.
These responses lead directly to the main
conclusion that all income from crime should
be confiscated.

that crime shouldn’t pay, and provides two
examples of unacceptable income that nobody
could really argue with – profit from fraud and
from bank robbery. So, should any of this have
been included in the list of reasons; or are
these just introductory sentences? You may
have interpreted this part of the argument as a
premise (reason), on the grounds that, without
the principle, the argument wouldn’t really
make a lot of sense; and that, in a general sort
of way, it does support the conclusion that
profit from crime should be confiscated.
But on closer inspection this is not the best
and clearest interpretation of what the author is
aiming to achieve. For his argument is not really
about crimes such as fraud and bank robbery. In
fact, it is more or less taken for granted that the
profits from these crimes should be forfeited if
the criminal is convicted. No supporting
reasons are given and none are needed. The real
argument begins with the word ‘But . . .’ at the
start of paragraph 2. Reading it that way, the
first paragraph can be seen more as an
introduction than as part of the reasoning.
The shape of the whole argument is:

Activity
3 As well as the responses to objections,
what other reasons are given in support of
the conclusion?

Commentary
The final paragraph adds a further set of
reasons that directly support the conclusion.
They are: (1) that criminals make a choice;
(2) that if they make that choice, the door to
respectable wealth should be closed; and
(3) that if would-be criminals know they will
never be able to cash in on their crime, they may
think twice before choosing to be criminals.
What about the first paragraph: where does
it fit in, and what is its function? It states that
there is an established legal principle, namely

4.8 Applying analysis skills 179

Mapping the structure
The previous diagram gives only the roughest
outline of the argument. It is like a route map
with just the main towns shown. It does not
give any of the reasoning that leads from one
to the next.
‘Mapping’ is a good word to use, because it
suggests another very useful way of
representing the steps in an argument. If you
enquire how to get from one place to another,
people will often give you a string of directions:
for example, ‘Go up to the traffic lights and
turn right. Stay on that road through a couple
of bends, past the big hotel on the left. Take
the third exit from the roundabout and the
immediate fork to the left . . .’ It can all be very
confusing; and it is very easy to miss a turning
or take the wrong one, after which you quickly
lose any sense of where you are.
A simple map like the one below is much
more helpful: it gives you an overall picture of
how the journey looks, how the roads
connect, how they relate to each other and the
surroundings, and so on.

180 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

Activity
Try building up a more detailed map of the
argument ‘Time to get tough’, showing how,
in your view, the different parts of the
reasoning lead to the conclusion.

Commentary
Notice that the task is to represent your view of
the way the argument is structured. This does
not mean that any analysis of the passage is as
good as any other, but it does mean that there
is some room for interpretation by the reader.
A suggested map of the argument follows.
Don’t worry if you have taken a slightly
different route to the conclusion, or
summarised the claims a bit differently. So
long as you have correctly understood the
direction of the argument and its final
conclusion, then the exercise has served its
purpose.

Introduction
Principle of no profit
But …
Many criminals are becoming
celebrities just because of
their crooked past.
Law doesn’t go far enough / should be extended.
No one forced into crime.
The producers’ argument is
wrong: all income is profit
from crime.
(reply to counter-argument 1)

CONCLUSION
All income … should
be confiscated

Victims also have rights /
don’t become celebrities.
(reply to counter-argument 2)

Once criminal has made choice,
door should be closed.

Would-be criminals
might think twice.

Summary
• Longer arguments can be analysed in
broadly the same way as shorter ones.
• Longer arguments may have
sub-arguments as part of their reasoning.

• A very common line of reasoning is to set
up a counter-argument and then knock it
down.

4.8 Applying analysis skills 181

End-of-chapter assignment
Using some of the methods discussed in
this chapter, as well as those you studied in
Chapters 2.4 and 2.5, map out the structure
of the following argument.

SAY NO TO CHEATS
The governing bodies who
control international sport
are right to prohibit the use
of performance-enhancing
drugs and to operate their
policy of zero tolerance
against athletes who break
the rules. There is more than
enough medical evidence to
establish that many of the
substances that sports stars
are tempted to use to
increase their strength and
stamina are extremely
harmful to their health.
Permitting their use, or
turning a blind eye to it, can
have tragic long-term
consequences, as many
former athletes have
discovered to their cost.
Young people are natural
risk-takers and are often
reckless about their own
futures. That, coupled with
the huge rewards that can be
won by reaching the top in
their chosen sport, will often
drive them to disregard
medical advice and think
only of the gold medal, or the
big sponsorship deal, or the

182 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

glory of competing for their
country. Those who regulate
the sports have a duty of
care over these men and
women. To stand by whilst
they harm themselves would
be grossly irresponsible.
But there is another reason
why the use of drugs in sport
cannot be tolerated. The
purpose of sport is to
discover who is the best. The
only way to achieve that is to
start with a level playing field
and for every competitor to
have an equal chance of
winning. You can’t say who is
best if some competitors are
cheating by stealing an
advantage. Therefore, if
drugs can be driven out of
sport, we will once again
know who the real
champions are.
It is sometimes argued that
drugs give no more of an
advantage than other
perfectly legitimate practices,
such as following special
diets and taking dietary
supplements, which can also
boost an athlete’s

performance. So can the
latest hi-tech equipment and
clothing, computerised
training programmes,
physio- and psychotherapies,
and so on. Is that not
cheating?
No. There is all the
difference in the world
between eating certain foods
and taking drugs because
drugs, unlike foods, are
banned substances. Any
athlete who wants to can
take advantage of a special
diet or the latest equipment
and training techniques. But
only those who are willing to
break the rules can benefit
from taking drugs. Anyway, if
you start saying that drugtaking is fine because it is
no different from energygiving food you would end up
having to allow athletes to
run races with jet engines
strapped to their backs.
One more thing: if the top
athletes get away with taking
drugs, the young people for
whom they are role models
are far more likely to do the
same. For their sake too, the
pressure on the cheats must
never be relaxed.

4.9 Critical evaluation
In the last chapter you worked on mapping
out the structure of two arguments: one with
an accompanying commentary, and one on
your own in the end-of-chapter assignment.
In this chapter you will be looking at the same
two arguments from the point of view of their
strengths and weaknesses, success or failure.
This is critical evaluation.

A: Time to get tough
Read through the whole argument on
page 178 again to remind yourself of its
conclusion and supporting reasons. If
necessary, also look again at the analysis of its
structure on page 181. Once you have it clear
in your mind you can move on to the next
range of questions: Is it a good argument?
Does it work? Does the reasoning succeed in
supporting the conclusion?
It is now that the work you did on analysing
and mapping the argument really starts to pay
off. It has split the argument up into a number
of manageable bits that you can consider one by
one. It has also put the different parts of the
passage in their place, so that you know exactly
what their functions are. So, for example, we can
pass over the first paragraph because it is mostly
introductory, and move straight to where the
argument really begins, in paragraph 2.
Paragraph 2 draws the intermediate
conclusion that the law that convicted
criminals should not profit from their crimes
doesn’t go far enough and should apply to
ex-criminal celebrities (as well as former
fraudsters, bank robbers etc.).

Activity
What reasons are given in paragraph 2 for
this conclusion? Are they convincing?

Commentary
The reasons given are that these celebrities
often make big money and that they would
not do so if they had not been criminals in
the past. Provided you accept that both
statements are true, then they do give
support to the suggestion that the law needs
extending, which paves the way for the main
conclusion (in paragraph 5) that such income
should be confiscated. For if it is a fact that
some people do profit from having been
law-breakers – and for no other reason than
being law-breakers – then the principle
referred to in the introduction is (arguably)
being broken.
The big question is whether the reasons are
both acceptable, especially the second. The
first claim is fairly obviously acceptable
because it is a known fact that ex-convicts
who become presenters, film stars and so on
make big money. It could easily be checked
and figures produced to support it if anyone
doubted its truth. But what grounds has the
author got for the second reason, that these
celebrities ‘would never have had such careers
if it weren’t for their crooked past’? Certainly
none that are stated. It is an unsupported claim,
which the author is expecting the reader to
take on trust.

Assumption
If you cast your mind back to Chapter 2.9 you
will recall that many, if not all, natural-language
arguments rest on implicit assumptions as well as
on stated reasons. The conclusion that the
author draws in paragraph 2 rests on certain
such assumptions: for example, that ex-criminal
celebrities do not have talents that could have
made them famous or successful if they had not
been criminals. Unless you assume this you
cannot accept the conclusion. But since the

4.9 Critical evaluation 183

reader has no more reason to accept than to
reject the assumption, it is a potential weakness
in the argument.

Flaw
It could even be said that the need to make this
assumption is a flaw, or reasoning error, if you
consider it to be an unwarranted assumption.
Recall, from Chapter 2.10, that a common flaw
in reasoning is the assumption that because two
things are both true, one is therefore the cause
of the other. Does the author make that mistake
here? Is he saying that because a celebrity was
once a criminal, that must be the cause of their
rise to fame and consequent wealth?
If you think that is what he is saying, then it
would be right to identify this as a flaw in the
argument. If an argument depends on an
unwarranted assumption, then it is fair to say
it is flawed, or that it is unsound, or that there
is a ‘hole in the argument’.
But the author is no fool, and is obviously
aware of the potential weakness in paragraph
2. That is probably why, in the next paragraph,
he ‘anticipates’ a counter-argument that
challenges his assumption(s). The purpose
behind this is not to admit to a weakness, but
to block the challenge that threatens to
expose it. The challenge is that celebrity
wealth does not come directly from crime, but
from ‘redirected talent’. The author’s response
is firstly that the producers and others who
make this challenge take a cut of the profits
and therefore ‘would say something like that’;
and secondly that gangsters need no talent:
their criminal reputations are enough. And he
concludes that the income from becoming a
celebrity is therefore still profit from crime,
whether it is direct or indirect. It is a strong
and uncompromising response.

Activity
How successful do you think the author’s
reply is in paragraph 3? Does it meet the
objection or not – and why?

184 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

Commentary
The response does not sweep away the
objections; and it doesn’t give any good reason
to warrant the author’s assumptions. We’ll
take the second part of the response first. This
is simply that an ex-convict does not need any
talent. But, even if it is true, the fact that
someone needs no talent to become a celebrity
does not mean that he or she has no talent –
say, as comedian, or actor, or poet. This
remains a mere assumption, and one that is
easily contested, for there clearly have been
ex-criminals who have won acclaim for other
achievements besides crime.
The first part of the reply is no better. In fact
it is no more than an insinuation. The author
wants us to believe that the producers and
others are all motivated by profit, and would
therefore say whatever was needed to protect
their ‘cut’. It doesn’t answer the actual claim
that ex-convicts may have talents as well as
notoriety. There is also a fresh assumption
here, namely that the only people who claim
that ex-convicts have talents are producers or
others who have a vested interest. In reality
there may be many people, with no vested
interest, who would also agree with the
counter-argument.

Attacking the person
This line of argument is a very common kind
of fallacy, which needs to be guarded against.
It has its own Latin name, argumentum ad
hominem, meaning an argument directed ‘at
the person’ (literally the man), rather than at
the reasoning. What makes it a fallacy is that
the argument could be perfectly sound and
effective, even if the person who is making it is
supposedly unreliable or wicked or deceitful or
stupid, or has a vested interest, or anything
else that the opponent wants to say to attack
their reputation. If the people who have
succeeded in becoming celebrities do also have
talent, then the counter-argument is a strong
one, whether or not some of the people who
say so have selfish reasons for wanting it to be
true. You cannot make the argument go away

just by discrediting those who may use it. Yet it
is surprising how often this strategy is used.
What you can legitimately say is that if the
only support for some point of view comes
from an obviously unreliable source and from
no other, then we ought to treat it with some
suspicion. But that is a very different matter
from saying, as the author does in this case,
that because certain people ‘would say that,
wouldn’t they!’, the substance of what they say
must be false.

Activity
Another counter-argument and response
follow in the fourth paragraph. Critically
evaluate the reasoning in this paragraph,
identifying any assumptions and/or flaws
that it contains.

Commentary
You probably picked up straight away that
there was another ad hominem argument here.
The claim that a concern for the rights of
ex-convicts is ‘typical of . . . woolly-minded
liberals’ is obviously directed at the person
rather than their argument. However, the
author does go on to say why such concerns are
misplaced, and here the argument is much
stronger. Thus if you ignore the ad hominem part
of the paragraph you are still left with two or
three reasons that do respond to the objection,
and (if true) also support the author’s own
argument. These are the claims that:
• victims also have rights, one of which is
the right not to see those who hurt them
enjoying wealth and celebrity
• victims don’t get the same chances (of
celebrity) as ex-convicts.
These are powerfully persuasive points. You can
easily imagine how frustrating and insulting it
would be for someone who had been attacked
or robbed to later watch the person who had
done this hosting a television show, or seeing

his bestselling autobiography serialised in the
newspapers or made into a successful film. The
victim might be forgiven for thinking, ‘Some
of that fame has been got at my expense. The
criminal gets the money and I get nothing.
What is more, I am not a celebrity because no
one is really interested in my injuries or losses,
only in his wickedness.’
But, persuasive as it may be, is this
reasoning sound? Are there any assumptions
hidden behind the strong language? Arguably,
yes. For a start you would have to assume that
there really is a ‘right’ of the kind the author
claims for the victim. People have rights not to
be harmed by others, but those rights are dealt
with by the courts when they hand out their
sentences. Once such sentences have been
served, is there really a continuing right for
the victim never to see the criminal doing
well? Arguably, no – as we shall see when we
look at further argument in the next unit.
What the author is asking us to accept in
this paragraph is that allowing criminals to
exercise their rights to a fresh start is unfair to
their former victims. But this requires another
major assumption. It is the assumption that if
victims and criminals both have rights, the
victim’s rights should come first. Without this
assumption there are no grounds for the
conclusion; for if, as the counter-argument
claims, an ex-convict has the same rights as
anyone else, then it is hard to see how the
author can claim that the victim should have
some special right over the criminal. This is a
potential weakness in the argument, and it is
one we will return to in Chapter 4.10.

Conclusion
So we come to the last paragraph, which
consists of the conclusion and a further
sub-argument. It has two strands. One is that
people freely choose to become criminals; and
that if they make that choice they should be
barred from future (‘respectable’) wealth. The
other is that if people thinking of becoming
criminals know they will be effectively

4.9 Critical evaluation 185

outlawed in this way they may have second
thoughts about turning to crime at all.

Activity
As you did with the earlier steps in the
argument, critically evaluate the reasoning in
the last paragraph.

Commentary
This is possibly the strongest part of the
argument. It places the responsibility for
becoming a criminal firmly on the individual,
and suggests, reasonably enough, that if that
individual then faces having his wealth
restricted, he has no one to blame but himself.
Opponents of the argument cannot say that
the criminal has not been warned. The
argument is strengthened further by the claim
that this may also deter people from crime,
which is probably the best argument there is
for punishment of any sort.
But here, too, there are certain questionable
assumptions. One is that young people
tempted by crime would even think about
becoming legally rich and famous, far into the
future. And if they did, would they care that
they would be prevented from doing so?
Probably not. Another is the assumption that
people do all freely choose their lives; that
none is ever drawn into bad ways by their
upbringing, or the influence of others, or
through knowing no better. Without the
assumption that there is truly free choice, it
would be harsh to say no one should ever be
given a second chance.

Power of persuasion: rhetoric
If you read the ‘Time to get tough’ text
casually, and uncritically, it is easy to be
impressed by the argument. Your first reaction
might be: yes, many criminals do profit from
the fact that they have done wrong and
become well known because of it. And this
does not seem right or fair. But, as we have

186 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

seen, the argument is not necessarily as sound
or as conclusive as it may at first seem: there
are a number of hidden assumptions and even
flaws in the reasoning, when you come to
consider it critically.
Part of the persuasiveness of this argument
comes from the language the author uses to
press his case. Look at two of the phrases used
in paragraph 2: ‘glitzy new careers’ and
‘crooked past’. Both help to build up a picture
of something both cheap and nasty. In the
next paragraph we are told that a ‘notorious
gangster needs no talent’, reinforcing the
negative impression that is being created of
the convict-turned-celebrity.
We call this expressive ingredient of the
text rhetoric, to distinguish it from the plain
reasoning, the underlying argument. Authors
use rhetorical devices of various kinds to
embellish their arguments, to make them
more forceful. There is nothing wrong with
this: it is not a misuse, or some kind of
cheating, to express an argument in a forceful
way, provided there is an argument to
embellish. When rhetoric is misused is when
there is nothing else but strong words, and
there are no substantial grounds underlying
it. Don’t make the mistake of picking out a
colourful phrase and labelling it as a flaw just
because it is highly rhetorical. Do, however, be
on guard against authors who employ empty
rhetoric: colourful language to camouflage
weak or non-existent argument. (Journalists,
politicians, and some lawyers are among the
worst offenders!)
Of course, the impression that the author’s
language creates might be the right
impression, or at least one that you can
sympathise with. Many of the celebrities that
the author has in mind may well be
thoroughly unpleasant, untalented people;
and the celebrity they gain may be shallow,
‘glitzy’, and the rewards undeserved. But that
should not blind you to the fact that wellchosen language can heavily influence the

way you respond to an argument; that there
is always a danger that the reasoning can take
second place to emotions or sympathies. And
if that happens you are not responding in a
fully critical way.
We also saw, in paragraph 4, how potential
opponents of the argument are dismissed as
‘woolly-minded’. According to the author they
are ‘endlessly ready to defend the rights of
thugs and murderers without a thought for
their victims’. And we are presented with the
image of these same thugs and murderers
‘strutting about enjoying . . . a mega-buck
income’. The language leaves us in no doubt
which side the author is on. But more than
that, the author wants to manoeuvre us into a
kind of trap, where the choice seems to be
between defending the bad guys or supporting
their innocent victims.
A critical approach reveals that this
argument is strongly biased when it comes to
describing the different groups of people
involved. There is no concession that there
may be some ex-convicts who have
genuinely turned their backs on crime, who
have real talent as actors or writers, and who
do what they can to put right the harm they
have caused. Does the author include such
people in the same category as those whom
he describes as ‘strutting about’ in their
‘glitzy new careers’? The fact is we don’t
know, because he has conveniently – and no
doubt deliberately – left them out of the
picture.

Decision time
So, do we rate this as a good argument or a
poor one, overall? That final verdict is left to
you. You will probably agree that it is quite a
persuasive argument, but that it has
weaknesses as well as strengths; and that it
makes some claims and assumptions that are,
at the very least, questionable. Whether or not
these are enough to make you reject the

argument, you must decide. You will have the
chance to do so in the end-of-chapter
assignments.
Be careful, however, that in making this
decision you are not just saying whether you
agree or disagree with the author’s opinion or
his conclusions. You could quite reasonably
think that the conclusion is right but that the
argument is poor. Alternatively, you might
think it is a strong and compelling argument,
but, for reasons of your own, disagree with its
conclusion. This is the most difficult position
for a critical thinker to be in. If you really find
the argument compelling, and you do not
dispute its premises, then rationally you
should accept its conclusion, even if this
means changing a previously held view. If you
still reject the conclusion, you need to be able
to say where the argument fails – and that can
be quite hard to do if it is a persuasive
argument.

B: Say no to cheats
We turn now to the argument you analysed for
the assignment at the end of Chapter 4.8: ‘Say
no to cheats’. It contains a very common line
of argument that occupies the first two
paragraphs. It takes the following form:
‘Such-and-such is harmful, or could be
harmful. Therefore it should be prohibited.’
This line of reasoning is often referred to as the
argument from harm, and is an important
ethical argument.

Activity
Reread paragraphs 1 and 2 of the passage
on page 182, and remind yourself of the
reasons given there to support the main
conclusion. In arguing for the main
conclusion, what underlying assumption is
also made? Do you think it is a warranted
assumption?

4.9 Critical evaluation 187

Commentary
The argument in the first two paragraphs is as
follows:
R1	Medical evidence and past experience
suggest that performance-enhancing
drugs (PED) are harmful.
R2	Young athletes are reckless.
R3	To stand by while they harm themselves
would be irresponsible.
	
IC	The governing bodies have a ‘duty of
care’ for athletes.
	
C	They are right to prohibit PED.
This seems a reasonable argument. If you
accept the truth of the premises, and there is
no obvious reason not to, then a strict ban on
PED would seem like a sensible policy to
follow. But ‘sensible’ does not necessarily
mean ‘right’, and that brings us to the big
assumption that the argument makes: that
athletes don’t have the right to make these
choices for themselves; or that the authorities
do have the right to make the choices for
them, just on the grounds of the dangers PED
may pose to their health.
The argument from harm (or risk or danger)
to the need for prohibition is often
underpinned by this kind of assumption: that
those in charge have the right to tell grown
men and women what they may or may not
do to their own bodies. Is it a warranted
assumption? In general, no. Of course,
authorities do on occasions impose rules for
our own good or safety. Many countries
prohibit the riding of motorcycles without a
crash helmet, or driving of cars without a
safety belt. But there are many other dangerous
activities which we are not prevented from
doing (such as mountaineering and skydiving)
on the grounds that although they are
dangerous, we nevertheless have the right to
do them if we want. Usually a prohibition
needs other arguments beside the argument
from self-harm, for example that the harm

188 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

extends to others as well. For example, the
strongest argument for banning smoking in
public places is that non-smokers as well as
smokers are affected. If the argument were only
that smoking harms the smoker, it would not
have anything like the force that it does have.
So the argument contained in the first two
paragraphs alone looks a bit wobbly after all,
not from what it states but from what it
assumes. However, the author was probably
well aware of this because his argument does
not end there. It goes on to say (paragraph 3):
‘But there is another reason . . . (for not
tolerating PED)’.

The argument from fairness
The second main strand of the reasoning is the
argument that it is unfair, in fact cheating, to
take PED, and that they should be prohibited
for that reason as well as the health risks.
Paragraph 3 concludes that if drugs can be
driven out of sport we will (once again) be able
to identify the ‘real champions’.
There is another assumption lurking here:
that there are not some other ways, besides
PED, of gaining unfair advantages. To meet that
possible objection, the author sets out, and
responds to, a counter-argument that there are
indeed some practices that are perfectly
legitimate but are cheating of a sort. The
author’s response is that PED are in a different
class, precisely because they are prohibited.

Activity
Give your evaluation of the author’s response
to the counter-argument in paragraph 5. Is
the reasoning sound, or can you see any
flaws in it?

Commentary
There are in fact three serious flaws that need
to be looked at very carefully. These are known
as the ‘straw man’, the ‘slippery slope’ and
‘begging the question’. Two of them relate to
the last sentence of paragraph 5: ‘Anyway, if

you start saying that drug-taking is fine
because it is no different from energy-giving
food you would end up having to allow
athletes to run races with jet engines strapped
to their backs.’

A straw man
A ‘straw man’ argument is one in which the
opposing argument has deliberately been
made weak, to the point where no one would
be likely to make or support it. It gets its
strange name from the custom of making
human figures out of straw for target practice,
for example to shoot arrows at.
This is what the author does here. Whether
or not you knew the name ‘straw man’, you
should have noticed that in the counterargument there is no suggestion that drugtaking is ‘fine’, or that it is no different from
eating food. The counter-argument is much
more subtle than that: it merely points out
that there is a difficulty in distinguishing
between permitted ways of getting an
advantage and prohibited ones. That does not
mean that anyone raising the objection thinks
PED should be permitted, only that the
problem is not as simple as it seems.
Thus the author is arguing against an
opponent who doesn’t really exist. It looks as
though he has scored a point, but it doesn’t
count because it is such a cheap point. You will
often find this flaw in arguments that you
read. It can be persuasive if you fail to spot it.
And, if it’s done deliberately, it is cheating!

A slippery slope
Even if there were no ‘straw man’ fault in the
argument, there is another flaw in the same
sentence. It has a curious name, too: it’s often
called a ‘slippery slope’. This comes from the
idea that once you are on a slippery slope you
can’t stop yourself going all the way to the
bottom. In this case, if you say that some PED
are very like some food supplements, then,
according to the author, there is nothing to
stop you saying that anything athletes do to
gain an advantage is all right.

This is obviously nonsense. The difference
between special diets or training techniques
and the use of certain drugs is really quite
narrow. Even the experts have some difficulty
drawing a line between, say, a ‘food
supplement’ and an actual drug. This is why
the counter-argument has to be taken seriously
even if you are in favour of prohibiting PED.
The idea that athletes could use jet-propulsion
is in a completely different league, and it is
perfectly possible to argue for one without
having to go to the other extreme.

Begging the question
The third flaw relates to the second sentence
in the paragraph: the claim that PED are
different from other ways of improving
performance because they are banned, and that
that is what makes it cheating to use them.
But the main conclusion is that drug-taking
should be banned. You cannot validly say that
something should be banned just because it is
bad, and bad because it is banned! This is what
is known as ‘begging the question’. You can
see why it is called begging the question with
the argument simplified as follows:
It is right to ban PED (conclusion).
Why?
Because using PED is cheating.
Why is it cheating?
Because PED are banned.
Another way to describe this flaw is to point
out that it contains circular reasoning, or a
circular argument. The author is arguing for the
ban on PED from the ban on PED. Many of the
flaws you find in arguments are due to circular
reasoning or question-begging. Sometimes the
circularity is obvious, as it is in this argument.
In others it is much more carefully disguised,
and you have to be vigilant to spot it.

The argument as a whole
We have found a number of weaknesses, flaws
and questionable assumptions in the
argument for prohibiting performanceenhancing drugs. That does not mean that we

4.9 Critical evaluation 189

have to reject the argument as a whole, and it
certainly doesn’t mean we have to reject its
conclusion. Most people find the practice of
taking PED totally unacceptable and are in full
agreement with its prohibition. Most people
also consider it to be cheating and believe that
it harms the health of athletes.
But the converse is also true. Just because we
agree with the author’s main conclusion of an
argument does not mean we have to approve
of the reasoning. As critical thinkers we need to
be able to evaluate an argument objectively
whether we agree with it or not. In fact,
agreeing with the author can often make the
job of evaluation more difficult because we are
likely to be making the same assumptions and
wanting the same outcome.

Summary
• A critical evaluation means deciding
whether the claims and assumptions made
in an argument are warranted.
• It means identifying any flaws in the
reasoning.
• It means assessing the strength of the
support that the reasons, if true, give to
the conclusion.
• It means distinguishing between the
rhetoric and the reasoning in the text.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Look at the following response to the
argument ‘Time to get tough’, and critically
evaluate the reasoning it employs.
	You call people like me woollyminded liberals, but look what you are
arguing for: denying anyone who has
committed a crime a chance to earn a
living, however hard they may try to
go straight and start afresh. As well as
being inhumane, that will have the
opposite effect from what you want.
You’ll just end up with streets full of
ex-cons who can’t get work and are
driven back to violent crime, and even
more victims to feel sorry for.
2 Consider the following short argument, on
a very different topic. Is it sound? If not,
identify what is wrong with it.
	The dinosaurs obviously became
extinct because of a single
catastrophic event such as a large

190 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

meteorite or dramatic upheaval in
the climate. This would mean that
they did not undergo a gradual
disappearance lasting many centuries
or millennia, but that they were
wiped out practically overnight. The
fact that they died out so quickly also
means that there could only have
been one cause of their extinction,
not many as was once assumed; and
that whatever the cause was, it was
immense and final.
3 C
 hoose one of the two arguments studied
in the chapter. Summarise the critical
comments that were made, and respond to
them with your own observations. Finally,
give an overall evaluation of the argument,
saying how successfully or unsuccessfully
it supports its conclusion(s).
Answers and comments are on page 325.

4.10 Responding with further
argument

Evaluating an argument means deciding
whether or not the claims made in it are
acceptable, and whether or not they support
the conclusion. Further argument goes a bit
further: it is your opportunity to put some of
your own ideas on the table, either supporting
or challenging the author’s conclusions.
It has to be said straight away that further
argument is not any argument: it must relate
directly to the text you are working on. It is
not a chance just to set off on some line of
your own that happens to be on a related topic.
You would get no credit in an exam if you
read the article ‘Time to get tough’ – which
featured in the last two units – and then
wrote about prison reform, or the abolition or
reintroduction of the death penalty. There
may be issues that connect these topics to the
argument about profiting from crime, but
they are not central issues. Your further
argument must be for or against the
conclusion. Otherwise it is just a digression.
Evaluation often leads very naturally into
further argument, and it is sometimes difficult
to say where one ends and the other begins. For
example, here is part of a student’s response to
the third paragraph of ‘Time to get tough’:
[1] The author says that notorious gangsters
don’t need any talent to attract an
audience, and that their reputations are
enough. This may be true, but it doesn’t
mean that notorious gangsters don’t ever
have some talent. They may be very
talented. People often think of a gangster
being a stupid person, who just uses
violence to get their way, but there are
gangsters who have got where they are by

their intelligence. It takes brains and
imagination to plan a big crime and get
away with it. It takes brains to be a
television presenter. So you can’t say
that because someone has been a
criminal they haven’t got the ability to be
a celebrity. I read a book by a reformed
drug addict who had stolen to buy drugs,
and it was brilliant, as good as any other
writer could do. It wouldn’t have been
published and sold in the bookshops if
he was stupid and couldn’t write.
Therefore this statement by the author is
misleading.
Is this extract from the student’s essay
evaluation or further argument, or both?
Plainly it is both. It is a critical evaluation
because it exposes a weakness, a questionable
assumption, in the author’s reasoning.
However, it does much more than just say
there is a weakness. It highlights it by bringing
in fresh claims and counter-examples that
challenge the author’s assumption that a
person cannot be a criminal and be talented.
The student uses her own reasons for
concluding that the author’s claim is
misleading. She even draws on her own
(reading) experience to illustrate the point she
is making. This clearly marks it as further
argument and not just evaluation.
Of course it is not a decisive further
argument. It doesn’t completely undermine
the author’s case: it merely kicks away one of
the supporting planks. To this extent we can
say it damages the argument rather than
destroys it: it seriously weakens it, but not
fatally.

4.10 Responding with further argument 191

Counter-example

New lines of argument

Counter-examples – i.e. examples that
challenge a claim – are very powerful weapons
for attacking arguments. As we saw in the
above extract, just one example of an excriminal who arguably does have talent
challenges one of the author’s main premises.

But further argument does not have to begin
from a particular point of evaluation. Provided
you do not wander off the central issues, you
can launch your own argument from the
passage as a whole. You may, for example, feel
that the author has missed out an important
consideration that has an impact on his
conclusions. Raising it would be a legitimate
form of further argument.
For example, there is no discussion in the
article about the motives criminals have for
becoming celebrities. Nor is there any
mention of the consequences. The author
seems to assume that the motives are always
selfish, on the part of either the criminal or
the producers etc. who take a cut; and that
nothing, apart from satisfying greed, comes of
it. Here are three pieces of further argument,
adapted from student responses, which take a
completely different line:

Activity
Look again at paragraph 4 of ‘Time to get
tough’ (if you don’t already know it by heart!)
and find a claim that could be challenged
with a counter-example. If you know of a
real-life counter-example, raise it. If not,
suggest a possible one. Then develop the
counter-example into a short further
argument.

Commentary
An obvious target is the last sentence of the
paragraph: the claim that victims don’t get the
chance to become celebrities. It is highly
vulnerable to counter-examples and, whether
you were able to think of an actual one or not, it
is clearly not far-fetched to suggest that a victim
of, say, a high-profile kidnapping or hostagetaking could become famous as a result, and
gain financially from telling their story.
Such an example could be developed as
follows:
 number of victims of crime have themselves
A
become celebrities and made big profits from
publishing their stories or appearing in the
media. Is this fair? There are many other
people who have suffered from accidents or
misfortune who have never been heard of. If
you are going to ban some groups of people
from celebrity income, simply because other
people have not had the same opportunities
(like the author does), then you would have to
ban everyone from making income from their
pasts – criminals and victims alike. Otherwise
how would you decide who deserved their
celebrity status and who did not?

192 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

[2] Criminals are selfish people. They take
what is not theirs and what others have
worked hard to get. They disobey laws.
They evade taxes. No one is going to tell
me that when and if they decide to go
straight and become big showbiz
personalities they suddenly change into
decent, law-abiding citizens. All they are
in it for is themselves, and they will do
whatever is necessary to get as much as
they can. Leopards don’t change their
spots. Cheats and thieves don’t become
honest, they just find other ways to
cheat.
[3] Some criminals grow up while they are in
prison and come out looking for legal
jobs, and some go into acting or writing
to make a living. The parts they play in
films and the books they write will
usually be about criminals or about
prison, and they have the experience to
make this realistic and true to life. This
has a very useful purpose because it
lets other people know what it is like to
be a criminal or a prisoner. It is not

glamorous or romantic like it often is in
fiction, it’s ugly and dangerous.
[4] Young people admire celebrities and
want to be like them. If you let big-time
gangsters and murderers become
celebrities you give young people a very
bad example to follow. Criminals become
role models. Also you give them the idea
they can be rich and famous by being
wicked and violent.

Activity
What point is being made in each of these
lines of further argument? Do they support
the argument in the article, or do they
challenge it?

Commentary
These were all examples of relevant and
perceptive further argument. Whether you
agree with what they say or not, they make a
valuable contribution to the debate.
Argument [2] supports the author’s
conclusion far more than it challenges it,
though it takes a quite different line of approach.
It would make a good response to any suggestion
that criminals can turn over a new leaf or put
crime behind them. It implies that criminal
celebrities will go on being dishonest if it suits
them. As you might expect, this student went on
to conclude that, given their records, they do
not deserve to keep the money they make.
The next extract [3] introduces the idea that
there can be good consequences from
criminals becoming actors and writers. This is
not an angle that is covered by the author, but
it is a relevant point to consider. Experiences
of life in the criminal world and in prison do
add to public awareness. If this is a good
thing – and the student claims that it is – then
allowing criminals to become writers, actors
and so on does have a useful purpose. It would
follow that there is some justification for
rewarding them, which of course challenges
rather than supports the author’s conclusion.

The third piece also considers the
consequences of allowing criminals to become
role models. It obviously supports the argument.

Rights – and wrongs
Probably the most important part of the
argument in ‘Time to get tough’ is the issue of
people’s rights. As observed when we were
evaluating the argument, the author clearly
assumes – and wants us to assume – that
ex-convicts don’t have the same rights as other
people, especially their victims, because they
have chosen a life of crime. Opposed to this is
the view that once the criminal has served their
prison sentence, then their debt to society has
been paid in full, and they come out with all
their human rights restored. As we know, the
author tries to rubbish this view as ‘woollyminded’ thinking. But that doesn’t stop you
from developing it more sympathetically in
your own argument. For example:
[5] It is the job of courts to punish criminals
who are caught. Unless their crime is bad
enough for a life sentence, they only lose
their human rights while the sentence
lasts. When they are released they
become ordinary citizens again, and
should have the same rights as all other
citizens, especially if they have learned
from their mistakes and are trying to ‘go
straight’. This is not woolly-minded at all.
What is woolly-minded is using our
feelings of sympathy for the victims as an
argument for punishing ex-convicts for the
rest of their lives. That’s unjust. As for the
victims’ right, yes, they do have the right to
see the person who has harmed them
punished. But the courts decide how
much, not the victims, or the media.

Balancing ‘for’ and ‘against’
Of course you may not disagree with the
author’s reasoning in the way the last critic
does. Instead you may agree with the author
that the law as it stands gives too little
consideration to the victims’ feelings. You might

4.10 Responding with further argument 193

argue that whereas a convict gets a limited
sentence to serve, the victim may carry the
injuries or scars for a lifetime. Where that is the
case, doesn’t it add insult to injury if the
criminal later makes a lot of money by telling or
selling the story?
But there is another possible response that
we have to consider before we finish this
discussion. Sometimes, not infrequently, we
hear arguments for both sides of some difficult
issue and we are impressed by both of them –
or alternatively by neither of them. For
example, you may feel, after evaluating and
thinking carefully about this argument, that
those who champion the victim and those
who champion the ex-criminal both have a
point, and that whichever way you decide you
will benefit one at the expense of the other. In
other words, if you stand by the rights of one
group, you affect the rights of another group.
That very often happens in real life, and it
makes it difficult, or even impossible, for those
who have to make decisions to do the ‘right
thing’ by everyone. There is not always a clear
choice.
Concluding that there is a balance between
equally strong arguments – or equally weak
ones – is a perfectly acceptable position to
take. It should not be used as a cowardly way
of avoiding an uncomfortable decision; but if
your critical reasoning leads you to that
conclusion, then you have no choice but to
declare a ‘draw’.
The next and final example demonstrates
how further argument can lead to a balanced
or neutral position:
[6] It is obviously not much of a punishment
for a vicious criminal to come from
prison and make a million dollars from a
film about the crime, none of which is
given to the victims who suffered from

194 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

what he did to them. But equally it is not
very just if someone has completed their
sentence and is then punished again by
having doors closed on certain careers.
It might even drive them back into crime,
instead of going straight, which would
create other victims. It all depends on
whose side you look at it from.
		 I think talking about ‘rights’ is the
wrong way to approach this problem.
We should think about what is best for
society rather than about individual
people: criminals or victims. Perhaps if
we were all less interested in wealth
and celebrity, the problem wouldn’t
arise in the first place, meaning that
we are all a bit to blame.

Summary
• Further argument can arise out of
evaluation, or it can be a new line of
reasoning altogether.
• Further arguments can be raised in
support of the author’s conclusion(s), or in
opposition to them.
• Sometimes further argument leads to a
balanced or neutral conclusion.

End-of-chapter assignment
‘Where performance-enhancing drugs in
sport are concerned, zero-tolerance is the
only policy that should be considered.’

Write your own argument to support or
challenge this claim.

4.11 A self-assessment
This final chapter in the unit brings together a
range of the critical skills you have been
using. It consists of an activity in three parts,
and is based on a standard exam question
type. There is one difference: the passage to
which the questions relate is from an
authentic published source. For that reason
the activity is not only good examination
practice; it is also a sample of how to read
critically and perceptively in a real-life
situation.
Most of the time, when you encounter a
news story or magazine article, you respond to
it with casual interest, but little more than
that. That’s fine, if you are reading for
entertainment or just gathering information.
But there are other times when you need to
engage with a text more actively, on a deeper
level. This applies if the text is on a subject you
are studying at school or college; or if you have
to respond to it in a discussion or debate; or if
it relates to your work. There are other
occasions, too, when there is no particular
external reason for you to engage with it
critically, but the article just ‘grabs’ you, and
you want more from it than you would get
from skimming through it once.
The document you will be working on
(page 196) was published in an edition of
Whale and Dolphin, the magazine of Whale and
Dolphin Conservation (WDC). It has some
interesting connections with the material you
worked on in Chapter 4.6, but it makes a very
different point. The natural features of
authentic texts make the task of critical
assessment more interesting, and more realistic,
but at the same time more challenging. As with
any text, you should read or scan the passage

once to get the gist of it. Note the kind of text it
is – its genre – and its source. These factors may
influence how you interpret and evaluate it
later. If it is an argument, note its conclusion
and the kind of reasons or premises that are
offered. Then answer the following questions,
rereading the text as necessary. (Although these
are examination-style questions, which would
normally have a time limit, there is no time
restriction here. Think about the text and
questions in depth, and apply all of the
concepts and critical methods you have been
studying in Units 2 and 4.)

Activity
a Show that you understand the structure of
the argument. You should identify the main
conclusion and the reasoning given to
support it.
b Critically evaluate the argument. You
should identify any assumptions, flaws and
weaknesses and assess their effect on the
strength of the reasoning.
c

‘Animals that show high levels of
intelligence deserve to be treated like
humans.’

	Write your own argument to support or
challenge this claim.

Commentary
The purpose of this commentary is to guide
you in assessing your own responses to the
questions: not just what you wrote, but how
you went about it. Remember that even before
you were given the three questions, you were
asked to read the passage once through to get

4.11 A self-assessment 195

WALK THIS WAY!
Studies show the art of tail-walking is spreading
amongst Adelaide’s Port River dolphins.
technique – furiously paddling
their tail fluke, forcing their
body out and across the water.
According to Dr Bossley, the
dolphins seem to walk on
water for fun, as it has no
other obvious benefit. The
WDC studies in Australia have behaviour seems to be
revealed a growing number of
cultural, although unusually it
dolphins in the wild are
is not linked to any practical
learning to walk on water.
use such as foraging for food.
WDC’s Dr Mike Bossley has
Tail-walking is rare in the wild
been observing Adelaide’s Port and more commonly seen
River dolphins for the past 24 among captive dolphins
years and has previously
trained to perform tricks.
documented spectacular
Billie is thought to have
tail-walking in two adult female learnt the trick during a brief
dolphins, Billie and Wave.
period when she was held
Now it seems that tailcaptive in a dolphinarium,
walking is spreading through
before being released back
the Port River dolphin
into the wild. It appears that
community. Up to six dolphins, she has passed this trick onto
including young infants, have
others in the pod who now
been seen mastering the
practise many times each day.

some general view of what it is about. This is
different from the directed reading that you
need to do in order to answer the questions,
but just as important.

Context and genre
When you first engage with a new text, one of
the first questions to ask is: What is the
context? There is less chance of
misunderstanding a passage if you know
something of its background and the purpose

196 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

WDC dolphin photographers
Marianna Boorman and Barbara
Saberton and have recently
documented Wave’s calf, Tallula,
also attempting to tail-walk. ‘As
far as we are aware, tail-walking
has no practical function and is
performed as some form of
recreation, like human dancing
or gymnastics,’ says Dr Bossley.
Adelaide’s dolphins are not
performing operas, or
composing symphonies as far
as we know. But tail-walking in
dolphins adds more evidence to
the contention that dolphins are
very intelligent and so similar to
humans that they are worthy of
a special ethical status: that of
‘non-human persons’.
Whale and Dolphin: magazine
of Whale and Dolphin
Conservation (WDC)

behind it. In this case we already know the
source, as it is acknowledged at the end of the
article. There is no named author, but we are
told that the piece appeared in the magazine
belonging to Whale and Dolphin
Conservation. This tells you something about
the genre to which the text belongs. (‘Genre’,
remember, means a kind or type, or sometimes
a style.) From its name alone it is a safe bet that
the magazine is principally concerned with
conservation issues regarding marine animals.

Its contents will be broadly scientific. But it will
probably have an agenda, or a ‘philosophy’,
which will influence the kind of articles it
contains and the kind of messages they will
send to the reader. We can also assume fairly
safely that the readers who subscribe to the
magazine will be sympathetic to arguments
that champion whales and dolphins and which
argue for their welfare and even their ‘rights’.
You may well have similar sympathies; many of
us do. Dolphins are lovable, playful and
seemingly intelligent creatures; and it is not
difficult to see why people might think that
they deserve the ‘special ethical status’ to
which the writer refers.
These contextual details are important
when you move from analysing the article to
evaluating the reasoning in it. In order to
think critically about this passage, you must
guard against being influenced by emotions or
sympathies, and be aware of any bias in the
author’s treatment of the evidence. Obviously,
the author is motivated by the wish to protect
and champion the cause of dolphins. There is
nothing wrong with this. ‘Bias’ should not
necessarily be an accusation. It is not a hidden
agenda. But if there is an agenda, hidden or
open, it should be recognised as part of the
context, and taken into account.

The questions
You may have noticed that the three questions
correspond to the three core components of
critical thinking: (a) analysis; (b) evaluation;
and (c) presenting further reasoning of your
own (see Chapter 1.2). These are also the
assessment objectives for practically every
critical thinking examination syllabus,
including the Cambridge Thinking Skills AS
Level. This activity addresses all three. We’ll
discuss them in turn.

(a) Analysis
The bulk of the text is informative and
descriptive, and it is only towards the end that
the author’s purpose becomes really evident.
However, once the reader gets to the last

paragraph it is clear where the argument is
leading. There he states the ‘contention’ that
dolphins are similar to humans – so similar, in
fact, that they deserve to be considered as
‘non-human persons’, and he concludes that
tail-walking adds to the evidence that supports
this contention. The conclusion is thus quite
complex. You could identify it in full by
simply quoting the last sentence. If you
paraphrased and abbreviated it you may have
said something like this:
C Tail-walking supports the view that
dolphins are so intelligent they deserve
the ethical status of ‘non-human persons’.
There is an alternative way to analyse this
sentence, however. You could say that tailwalking adds to the evidence for special status
because it shows how intelligent dolphins are,
and how similar to humans. In other words
the first part of the long last sentence is now
an intermediate conclusion; the second half
the main conclusion. This is a deeper analysis;
also a more structured one. But either
interpretation captures the author’s purpose.
(Note that the conclusion is not that dolphins
deserve ‘person’ status. That would be far too
strong, and if you were to interpret the
conclusion that way, and then criticise it for
being too strong, you would have committed a
classic ‘straw man’ fallacy.)
Now we move to the body of the argument.
Paragraphs 1 and 2 provide the factual
(evidential/observational) base, and one of the
main premises, namely that dolphins have
been seen ‘walking on water’. The photograph
could be included in the evidence, as could
the first sentence of paragraph 5.
However, the claim being made is not just
that the dolphins are walking on water but that
they are learning to do it; being taught. This is
not just assumed. It is inferred from the fact
that the practice is observed to have spread
from Billie and Wave to several other dolphins.
There is a further point in support of this
inference, in that Billie was once in captivity

4.11 A self-assessment 197

and is thought to have learned the trick there.
As stated in paragraph 3, tail-walking is rare in
the wild but more common in captivity; and in
paragraph 4 we learn: ‘It appears that [Billie]
has passed this trick onto others in the pod’.
What we have therefore is a sub-argument
supporting the major premise in paragraph 1
that dolphins ‘are learning to walk on water’.
The second major premise is that – according
to Dr Bossley – the dolphins seem to be
performing the trick for fun. The reasoning for
this claim is that there is no other obvious
benefit, such as foraging for food. Dr Bossley is
quoted as inferring from this that it is
recreational, ‘like human dancing or
gymnastics’.
The reasoning to these two intermediate
conclusions is untidy, in the sense that they
are mixed up together. That is how it often is
in ordinary-language arguments. In a more
standard argument you would find the two
sub-arguments separated from each other.
Your job, therefore, was to identify and extract
the underlying argument. You could have
done this either descriptively, as above, or in
standard form, for example:
R1 Tail-walking (TW) has been observed to
be spreading among Port River dolphins.
R2 TW is rare in the wild, but more common
in captivity.
R3 One of the dolphins is thought to have
learned TW while in captivity.
IC1 A growing number of dolphins seem to
be learning to walk on water.
R4 TW seems to have no practical purpose.
IC2 It seems to be for fun (like human
dancing, gymnastics).
IC3 TW is evidence of intelligence and
similarity to humans.
C	TW is evidence that dolphins deserve
status of ‘non-human persons’.
(IC3 and C could be one main conclusion.)

198 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

As pointed out in earlier chapters, there are
often alternative ways of interpreting many
natural-language arguments, and your analysis
may have differed in some ways from the one
above. This is not a problem, provided you have
correctly identified the conclusion, and the
main reasons. Also, the depth of analysis that
you give may depend on how long you have to
do it in. Here, with unlimited time, we can
thoroughly dissect the reasoning, and examine
its structure in detail. In an exam, where you
may have no more than half an hour to answer
all three of the questions, you will need to pare
your analysis down to the key points.
The key points are the conclusion, obviously,
and the two main premises that tail-walking
appears to be learned (IC1) and that it appears
to be fun (IC2). These are the backbone of the
argument. If these three elements are not
identified in your analysis of the text, read the
passage again with the above comments in
mind. Whilst some arguments leave themselves
open to more than one interpretation, in this
passage it is difficult to see any other obvious
direction for the argument.
A final point: some of you may have noted
in your analysis that the evidence that is cited
is not ‘direct’ evidence (see Chapter 4.3,
page 145). The observations and inferences
are attributed to Dr Mike Bossley. However,
the conclusion is the author’s. We will see the
significance of this shortly when we turn to
evaluating the argument.

(b) Evaluation
Once you have identified the conclusion and
the main strands of reasoning, it is very much
clearer what evaluative points apply. The
basic critical questions are:
• whether the reasons (evidence,
observations) really do justify the
conclusions
• if so, whether the reasons are credible.
The order in which you deal with these
questions is a matter of preference. As a

general rule it makes good sense to take them
in the above order. If the conclusion does not
follow from the reasons, it really doesn’t
matter whether the claims are true or not,
since the argument is unsound either way;
whereas even when the premises are true and/
or acceptable we still have to check that they
support the conclusion (or conclusions).
However, on this occasion, there is so little
work to do on the premises that it is as well to
answer the second question first. Yes, the
evidence is credible. We can’t be 100 per cent
sure that the photograph isn’t a fake, or that
Dr Bossley hasn’t made up the whole story. But
we can be sure that this is very unlikely, and
that the purely factual claims are plausible.
Dolphins do learn this trick in captivity, and
some get returned to the wild where it would
be no great surprise if other dolphins copied
them. The claims are also verifiable: they could
easily be checked, so a reputable magazine
would be unlikely to invent them. It would do
the WDC cause no good to be found to have
made false or unsubstantiated claims.
As noted above, the bulk of the claims, and
inferences, are attributed to Dr Bossley. It is
therefore relevant to ask whether he is a
reliable source (see Chapter 4.4). Again the
answer is a pretty confident yes. With 24 years
of experience observing dolphins, Dr Bossley
almost certainly has had ample opportunity
and expertise to make the observations and
draw informed inferences from them.
So we come to the reasoning itself. We
know, thanks to our analysis, that it consists of
two sub-arguments leading to the main
premises that tail-walking is apparently
learned, and apparently performed for fun.
Why ‘apparently’? Because in the text the
claims are routinely qualified by words such as
‘seems’ or ‘appears’. So we have an inference
from increasing numbers of dolphins being
seen to walk on water since the arrival of Billie
and Wave (which are observed facts), to their
seeming to have learned it from each other.
That is a reasonable claim. And we have the

inference from its having no obvious practical
purpose to its seeming to be purely
recreational, like dancing etc. The recreational
part seems reasonable, too, though the
comparison with dancing is questionable.
These inferences are defensible. There is
evidence that the dolphins appear to be having
fun and learning tricks from each other. (It is
plausible, too, since dolphins appear to be
having fun a lot of the time anyway.) The
problem with the argument arises when the
author wants to say that tail-walking supports
the contention about special ethical status.
Let’s assume, for the sake of argument, that
dolphins do teach and learn and practise skills,
that their behaviour is cultural, and that they
do certain things that are no different from
dancing or gymnastics. There might, on these
counts, be some grounds for giving dolphins a
special ethical status, more like that of persons.
But Dr Bossley does not claim anything as
strong as this. His claims are cautious and
qualified: ‘. . . dolphins seem to walk on water
for fun’; it ‘appears that [Billie] has passed this
trick on to others in the pod’; ‘“As far as we are
aware, tail-walking is . . . like dancing”’. And so
on. Dr Bossley is reported as quite rightly
presenting these ideas as speculation, not as
fact. The only hard fact that is documented is
that dolphins have been seen tail-walking. It is
the author of the article who takes it to be
evidence of intelligence on a near-human
scale. But the evidence, so-called, is too weak
to support the much stronger and more
controversial ‘contention’.

Clarification
Another point you may have made was that
the term ‘ethical status of non-human persons’
needs explaining and defining, rather than
just throwing in at the end. ‘Ethical status’ in
the case of humans is familiar enough. It
brings with it certain entitlements: not to be
killed or subjected to cruelty, or denied
freedom or justice before the law, and so on.
But what can be meant by the status of

4.11 A self-assessment 199

‘non-human persons’? On one reading it is
almost contradictory: What is a person if it is
not human? On another reading, it could just
mean an animal anyway. If the status of
non-human persons differs from that of
humans and from that of other animals, we
need to know what it is. No conclusion can be
fully justified unless it is clear exactly what is
being argued for. (There is an important lesson
here for question (c) when we come to it.)

Assumptions
As with many arguments, the problem with
the reasoning in this passage can be put down
to a major assumption that the author makes.
In drawing the conclusion, the author
assumes that an animal’s behaviour is a
reliable indicator of its intelligence, and/or of
its thoughts or feelings. Perhaps this is a
reasonable assumption. But it is an
assumption nonetheless: there is no
independent support for it.
This assumption is not explicitly stated in
the text. However, it is implicit, meaning that
even though the author doesn’t state it, it
must be true for the conclusion to follow from
the premises. We can put this to the test by
seeing what effect it would have on the
argument if we denied the assumption. If it
were false that observed behaviour can tell us
anything about inner processes or human-like
feelings, then the observation of tail-walking
becomes worthless as evidence that dolphins
are intelligent, or that they are performing the
act for ‘fun’, or ‘teaching’ each other. They
may appear to be, as stated; but if appearances
count for nothing, these observations are not
evidence at all.
On the other hand, if you consider that the
assumption is warranted, and that their
behaviour is a reliable indicator of what
dolphins experience, then you may feel that
this argument does have some strength. One
important point in its favour is that the
conclusion itself is not overstated. It does not
declare that tail-walking is some kind of proof

200 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

that dolphins are like people. It just says that it
adds more evidence for such a view. However,
by saying that it adds more evidence, there is a
new assumption that some such evidence
already exists. If it doesn’t, then on its own the
evidence of tail-walking looks even weaker.

Flaws
You were also asked whether any flaws or
fallacies can be found in the reasoning. There
are several possible candidates, but we will
concentrate for now on just one part of the
document, namely the last two paragraphs.
Here we have Dr Bossley’s claim that: ‘“As far
as we are aware, tail-walking has no practical
function and is performed as some form of
recreation, like human dancing or
gymnastics.”’ Firstly, this carries the
implication that if something has no practical
purpose, then it has to be recreational, which
could be seen as an example of restricting the
options (see Chapter 4.7). There may be other
possible explanations for the behaviour
besides these two. However, if you think that
all acts are either functional or recreational,
then it is legitimate to imply this.
But there is arguably a more serious fault
here. It is using Dr Bossley’s claim as evidence
for the contention that dolphins are ‘so
similar to humans that they are worthy of a
special ethical status . . .’. ‘Recreations’,
especially activities such as dancing and
gymnastics, are distinctively human. We don’t
know if animals do anything that resembles
our sporting or artistic pastimes; so it is a
major assumption to suppose dolphins do,
especially in the context of arguing for
similarities between dolphins and humans.
This lays the argument open to the charge of
begging the question. How can we justify the
claim that tail-walking is ‘like human dancing’
without assuming that there is something
human about dolphin behaviour? But that is
the very issue that the argument is about.
(Note that ‘question’ in this context should be
understood as what is at issue, and not as an

ordinary question. Unfortunately people
often use the term ‘beg the question’ to mean
ask, or prompt or raise a question. But that is
not its traditional or technical meaning.)
There is one more classic fallacy that could
be mentioned. It is a common one, and one
you may have identified without giving it a
name. It is the fallacy of claiming that because
there is no evidence for something, it is (or is
probably) false; or, conversely if there is no
evidence against something, it is (or is
probably) true. It is known by the Latin
argumentum ad ignorantiam, meaning
argument from ignorance, or appeal to
ignorance: ‘ignorance’ meaning absence of
knowledge or evidence. (It doesn’t imply
stupidity!) Is this applicable here? Is Dr Bossley
saying that because we aren’t ‘aware’ (i.e. don’t
know) of any practical function for tailwalking, it must have no practical function,
and therefore be recreational instead? If so,
then this is a fairly clear case of argumentum ad
ignorantiam. There could be functions of
tail-walking that no one is aware of.

The principle of charity revisited
The evaluation so far has been heavily critical.
Has it been unfair in the process? Not if the
above interpretation of the reasoning is
deemed to be fair. So long as ‘Walk this way!’ is
understood as a definite argument, giving
reasons for the conclusion that dolphins are
sufficiently like humans to deserve special
status, then it is fair to take serious issue with
it. There is insufficient evidence to infer
anything about the extent to which dolphin
intelligence or motivation resembles that of
humans. As we have seen, the author relies
upon what appears to be the case to infer what
is the case; and that is always a dangerous step.
A robot that is programmed to make the sound
of laughter may look as if it is amused by
something, but no one would say it really
found it funny. And as we have seen, there are
at least three charges of fallacies which could
be levelled at the text.

If you gave the argument more credit than
this, that does not necessarily mean that you are
wrong. It may just mean that you interpreted it
more charitably. The principle of charity was
introduced in Chapter 2.7 (page 52). Its role in
assessing arguments is a very important one.
The maxim is that if there are two or more
interpretations of a text which the author could
plausibly have intended, we should settle on the
most favourable one, not the least. An
interpretation obviously has to correspond to
what the author has actually said: we can’t just
add new evidence, or change the premises to
help the author out. But if on one genuine
interpretation the author’s case is strong, and on
other(s) weak, then a fair-minded reader will
aim his or her evaluations at the strong one.
For instance, you might argue that there is
no question-begging because Dr Bossley is still
talking only about an appearance of dancing
and recreation. He is saying that dolphins look
like they are having a good time (in the way
humans do when they dance). Of course, that
weakens the premise, but it acquits it of the
fallacy. You could defend the argument
against the other two fallacy claims in a similar
way. For example: Dr Bossley is not inferring
that tail-walking follows from the lack of
evidence but just that as far as he can tell it is
just a bit of fun. Overall, too, you might want
to say that the author’s final conclusion is
quite moderate: merely that these
observations, however they are explained, add
something to the case for treating dolphins
more like we would treat ourselves; and that
the reasoning is up to supporting that claim.
There is another more radical interpretation
which we must always consider if we apply the
principle of charity fully. It is that the article is
not a serious, or hard-line, or literal argument
at all. On reading ‘Walk this way!’ you may
have felt that, whilst it was expressed in the
style of an argument, the author was really just
using it to explore an interesting idea; to try
out a hypothesis. You might say it was a
quasi-argument. That way you would interpret

4.11 A self-assessment 201

the text less as a full-blown argument, and
more as a thought-provoking discussion,
perhaps deliberately going too far just to liven
up the animal rights debate.
There is a danger when applying critical
thinking to real-life texts in assuming that any
contentious piece of writing or speech must be
understood as an all-out argument. There are
other ways of making a case, and a quasiargument may be one of them. But there is a
danger as well in applying the principle of
charity too liberally. You should not use it to
let every author ‘off the hook’. If, after careful
and critical assessment, you really think that
the author is in the business of arguing for a
conclusion, and persuading the reader that it
is right, then you must judge it accordingly,
even if that means rejecting it.

(c) Further argument
The commentary for this part of the activity
will inevitably be lighter than for the first two.
That is because it is your turn to produce the
argument. The authors of this book cannot
anticipate what your argument will be. We
can, however, give some guidelines for you to
use in assessing yourself. The guidelines take
the form of questions, and provide a checklist
of advice for answering questions of this type.

(i) What did you take the task, or instruction, to be?
Note that you were asked to produce an
argument to support or challenge the
quotation. You were not asked to discuss the
topic in an even-handed way, without reaching
any particular conclusion of your own. You
were asked to argue for the statement or
against it: to take sides. Did you do that? If
not, you missed the point of the question.

(ii) What did you make of the statement: ‘Animals
that show high levels of intelligence deserve to
be treated like humans’?
Some statements may allow us say: ‘This is
neither right nor wrong,’ and to give a balance
of arguments for each side. But this statement

202 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

doesn’t really leave that option. Either highly
intelligent animals deserve to be treated like
humans, or they don’t. Even if you wanted to
dilute it by adding words to the effect of ‘. . . . in
some ways but not others’, or ‘to some extent’,
that would be a challenge to the statement as
it stands.
We saw in the previous commentary, under
the subheading ‘Clarification’, that you need
to state very plainly what your conclusion is
before you set out to defend it. You need to do
this for yourself as well as for your readers.
Whether you were supporting or challenging
the quotation, you should have made it clear
how you understood it: for example, what
‘high levels’ would include, and what ‘treated
like humans’ means.

(iii) Did your reasoning really support your
conclusion?
Stating your own conclusion clearly and
explicitly is important. You can start by stating
it, or leave it until the end. Or you can repeat it
in more than one place, for emphasis. But
merely stating it is not the end of the matter.
The reasoning that you give for the conclusion
really must support it. It is very easy, partway
through your response, to waver, or give way
to doubts that you haven’t really got such a
good case after all. The solution is to plan
thoroughly what you are going to say – and
why – before you start to write. For instance: ‘I
support the statement because: R1, R2, R3 . . .’
Each of these should be a substantial reason, or
item of evidence. If you don’t have at least two
or three effective reasons in mind before you
begin, you may regret the line you have
chosen.

(iv) Did you develop some of your reasons?
More important than having lots of separate
reasons is the development you give to your
reasons – to some of them at least. A major
premise in your argument may need evidence
to support it – in other words, a sub-argument.
Development may also take the form of

explaining or clarifying. If your argument is
just a list of reasons, plainly stated, then think
about ways in which you could have enriched
and reinforced each step.

(v) Did you anticipate objections and opposing
arguments before you started, and deal with
some in your response?
One important and effective way to develop
your reasoning is to anticipate and counter
what the other side in the debate might say.
For instance, suppose one of the steps in your
argument was that more intelligent animals
are more likely to feel pain in the way humans
do, so we should spare them pain as we would
humans. One objection an opponent may
make – and some do – is that we have no
evidence of what animal pain is like, or even
that animals are conscious of pain at all; so
treating them like humans would be futile and
costly. You can develop your own point by
anticipating this objection, and then
responding critically to it. For example, you
could reply that just because we cannot know
that animals are conscious of pain, we can’t
just dismiss the possibility because of that.
That would constitute the so-called ‘argument

from ignorance’: that lack of evidence for some
claim is grounds for denying it.
This is not itself a line of reasoning that you
should have included in your answer. It is an
example of the kind of structure that you can
build into your own arguments, to develop
and strengthen your own premises. By
showing that your observations are not only
positive reasons for your conclusion, but also
that they are resistant to counter-claims and
counter-arguments, your case is strengthened
and shown to be more thoughtful, and more
critical.

Summary
• In this final chapter you have had the
opportunity to apply the three core
components of critical thinking. These are:
• a
 nalysing and interpreting texts
(including considerations of context,
genre, source, etc.)
• evaluating an argument
• presenting further argument of your own.

4.11 A self-assessment 203

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Explain briefly why it may be relevant to the
evaluation of the argument in ‘Walk this
way!’ to know its source.
2 To what extent would you say the author of
‘Walk this way!’ argues scientifically?
3 Which of the following sentences
expresses an assumption that is implicit
in paragraph 3 of the argument? (Give
reasons for your answer.)
A Acts that have no benefit must be
done for fun if they are done at all.
B Foraging for food is not a cultural
activity.
C It is wrong to train captive dolphins
to perform tricks.
D Captive dolphins must enjoy
performing tricks.
4 Briefly explain the meaning of the word
‘anthropomorphic’, with the help of a
dictionary if you wish. How might the
concept of anthropomorphism be used
to challenge the argument in the WDC
article?

204 Unit 4 Applied critical thinking

5 Examination practice
	Answer the three questions again with
a time limit of 10–15 minutes each. If
you wish you may also revise your earlier
answers now that you have studied the
commentary:
a S
 how that you understand the structure
of the argument. You should identify
the main conclusion and the reasoning
given to support it.
b Critically evaluate the argument. You
should identify any assumptions, flaws
and weaknesses and assess their effect
on the strength of the reasoning.
c

‘Animals that show high levels of
intelligence deserve to be treated
like humans.’

		Write your own argument to support or
challenge this claim.
Answers and comments are on pages 325–26.

Unit 5 Advanced problem solving

5.1 Combining skills –
using imagination

The next four chapters deal with more
advanced problems. In some cases these are
just harder or longer examples based on the
skills you have already learned. In other cases,
slightly more advanced use of mathematics is
required. This does not go beyond algebra and
probability at relatively simple levels but, if
you are not confident with this, you can first
look at Chapter 6.1, which may help you in
using these mathematical techniques. The
problems may involve the use of several
different skills in one question, require extra
stages of intermediate result or require more
imagination in developing methods of
solution. The examples in this unit, some of
which are longer and harder than those you
are likely to encounter in AS Level thinking
skills tests, will help you to improve your skills

and make the standard questions seem easier.
They will be particularly useful for those
candidates taking higher-level tests, including
A2 Level and some university admissions tests.
The end-of-chapter assignments include a
question from an A Level Thinking Skills paper
and show the progressive nature of such
questions, where either additional material is
introduced or the conditions of the question
are changed. Further examples showing the
nature and difficulty of actual A Level
questions can be found in past papers.
The problem below is an example of one
requiring imagination; although data
extraction and processing skills are needed,
the main difficulty is in finding a method by
which to solve the problem.

Activity
Grunfling is an activity held in Bolandia,
where competitors have to contort their faces
into the most extreme shapes. Several
Bolandian villages have a grunfling
competition each year. Each village puts up a
champion grunfler who demonstrates his or
her skills, then the villages vote one by one.
(They are not allowed to vote for their own
grunfler.) Each village awards 8 votes to their
favourite, 4 to the second, 2 to the third and
1 to the fourth. Clearly, tactical voting is
important, so the order of voting is changed
every year. This year, the villages vote in
order from most northerly to most southerly.
The results before the last two villages have

voted are shown (in voting order). Who still
stands a chance of winning?
Fartown

6

Waterton

5

Blackport

6

Longwood

24

Gigglesford

12

White Stones

9

Martinsville

24

South Peak

4

Riverton

13

Runcastle

17

5.1 Combining skills – using imagination 205

Commentary
This is mainly a data-extraction type question.
Such questions are normally quite
straightforward but this one includes a large
amount of information to digest, and a
method of solving it also needs to be found.
There are three important things (the first
skill is to identify these):
1 The scoring system, which means
that with two villages left to vote, the
maximum extra votes that any one
village can score is 16.
2 The fact that a village cannot vote for
itself, which means that Riverton and
Runcastle can only receive a maximum
of 8 more votes.
3 Some villages might score no more, so
any village that can pass the mark of 24
can still win.
Given these three things, the method becomes
much clearer. The appropriate maximum
available must be added to each team and the
result compared with 24. The allocation of the
lesser votes is unimportant, as they could go to
villages who have no hope anyway.
Adding 16 votes to each of the first eight
villages, we see that four of them can exceed
24: Longwood, Gigglesford, White Stones and
Martinsville. Adding 8 votes to each of the last
two, we see that Riverton cannot reach 24 but
Runcastle can reach 25. So five teams can still
win. Runcastle would be best advised not to
vote for Longwood or Martinsville!
You may see that this question required
no new skills, and the mathematics was
limited to simple addition and counting. The
difficulty in this question was in using the
information correctly and seeing how best
to proceed.
The next activity gives an example in which
the main problem is in identifying a method
of proceeding. The information in this case is
much simpler.

206 Unit 5 Advanced problem solving

Activity
A survey of Bolandian petrol prices showed
the average to be 82.5¢ per litre. Filling
stations in the province of Dorland made up
5% of the survey and the Dorland average
was 86¢ per litre.
On average, how much more expensive is
petrol in Dorland than in the rest of the
country?

Commentary
This problem is not, in principle, any harder
than those we have encountered earlier. It is
mathematically slightly more complex and a
clear idea of the meaning of an average must
be retained.
We can quickly note that 5% is 1 20 of the
total. One easy way to proceed is to assume
that there were 20 filling stations in the
survey, one of which was in Dorland.
The sum of the prices at all Bolandian filling
stations must have been 20 × 82.5¢ = 1650¢.
The price in the Dorland filling station was
86¢. Therefore the sum of the prices in the
remaining 19 was 1650¢ – 86¢ = 1564¢. The
average in the rest of the country was
1564
6
= 82
19
19
or about 82.3¢. So Dorland prices are, on
average, 3.7¢ more expensive than in the rest
of the country.
Since all the numbers are just over 80¢, we
could make life easier by subtracting 80¢ from
everything, leaving smaller numbers to work
with. As long as we remember to add the 80¢
back on at the end, this will still give the right
answer. For example, if we wanted the average
of 82¢ and 86¢, we could say this was
(82¢ + 86¢) ÷ 2 = 84¢. It would be much easier
to note that the average of 2¢ and 6¢ is 4¢, then

add this back on to the 80¢. In the example
above the calculations reduce to:
20 × 2.5¢ = 50¢
50¢ – 6¢ = 44¢
44
6
¢=2 ¢
19
19
Once again, experience and a lot of practice is
the way to become efficient at solving the
harder problems. The more different types of
problem you see, the more you will be able to
build on your skills and combine skills you
have previously learned into techniques for
solving new types of problem.
The activity below uses simple probability,
something we have encountered very little so
far. Once again, Chapter 6.1 gives some help if
you are not familiar with the mathematics. An
alternative way of answering the problem
using permutations is also shown below. The
question itself is probably harder and longer
than anything you will encounter in a
thinking skills examination.

Activity
My local supermarket has a promotional offer.
It gives a coloured token with every spend
over $50. There are three colours: red, blue
and yellow. When you qualify for a token, you
take a random one from a large bag which
contains equal numbers of each colour. When
you have collected one of each, you get a $20
rebate from your next shopping bill.
In order to maximise her chances, Helga
makes sure she spends just over $50 each
time she shops and plans on shopping four
times in the two weeks the promotion will run.
She is sure she will then have one of each.
What is her percentage chance of getting
a full set (to the nearest 1%)?
 2%   B 10%   C 11%  
A
D 44% E 100%

Commentary
As noted in the introduction, there are two ways
of approaching this problem. Using probability,
we can say that it doesn’t matter what colour she
gets on her first visit. The chances of her getting
a different colour on the second visit are 2 3 .
There are a lot of dead alleys here, so we
need to concentrate on the routes which lead
to success. These are (where ‘different’ means a
colour she hasn’t had before):
1 Any – different – different – repeat
2 Any – repeat – different – different
3 Any – different – repeat – different
There must be two ‘differents’ and the repeat
can be anywhere in the sequence. We can now
look at the probability of these three winning
combinations:
1 1×
2 1×
3 1×

× 13 × 1 = 29
2
1
2
3 × 3 × 3 = 27
2 × 2 × 1 = 4
3
3
3
27
2

3

1

(6 + 2 + 4) 12
=
= 44%
27
27
(to the nearest 1%). D is the correct answer.
We now look at an alternative way of
solving this problem using permutations. In
total there are 34 (= 243) orders in which she
can get her four tokens. However, all of these
will include at least one repeat so we must be
careful. Of these, any combination including
ABC (e.g. CABA) will do. All of these
combinations will have one repeat, so we can
list the winning combinations.
Listing those with two reds (Rs) we have:
Adding these I get

 RBY RRYB RBRY RYRB RBYR RYBR BRRY
R
YRRB BRYR YRBR BYRR YBRR
This is 12 in total.
(For those familiar with permutations, this is
4! ÷ 2!1!1! Here the exclamation mark means
‘factorial’ and means multiplying together
all the integers up to the one shown, so
4! = 1 × 2 × 3 × 4.)
There will be the same number with two Bs
and with two Ys, making 36 which fulfil the
requirement.

5.1 Combining skills – using imagination  207

We now need to list the losing
combinations. These must fall into three
categories:
 of the same colour: 3 combinations
4
(RRRR etc.)
3 of one and 1 of another: 24 combinations
(RRRB, RRBR etc. – check yourself that this is
right)
2 of one and 2 of another: 18 combinations
(RRBB, RBRB, RBBR, BRBR, BRRB, BBRR and
the same with the two other pairs of colours)
Thus we have 36 which win and 45 which lose;
81 in total, so 36 81 win or 44%.
The two methods of solving this were similar
in difficulty, but the permutations method
took a lot more care in not missing any options.
As noted in Unit 3 this is typical of many
problems, both in examinations and in the real
world: there is often more than one way of
solving a problem and it is necessary to keep an
open mind, especially if the method you are
trying is not working or is taking too long.

Summary
• We have looked at more difficult
problem-solving questions that require a
combination of skills to solve them.
• Longer questions can use several
different skills and progressively introduce
additional complexity.
• The value of experience has been
emphasised in recognising the skills
needed for a question and applying them
in an appropriate manner.
• We have seen the importance of recognising
the important elements in a question and
simplifying it by concentrating on these.
• We have seen how imagination may be
required to come up with methods of
solution for types of problem that you may
not have previously seen.
• Problems can sometimes have more than
one method of solution, so it is important
to keep the mind open for alternatives and
to choose a method which is effective.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Study the information below and answer the
questions. Show your working.
		 The driving licences issued in Great
Britain up until 1 April 1999 did not have
a photograph, but there were features to
help the police to check if a licence they
were shown was likely to be a valid licence
for a particular driver.
		 Jeremy noticed that the six-digit number
(shown in bold) on his driving licence might
be somehow associated with his date of
birth: SMITH 704309 J99RX. He was born
on 30 April 1979.
		 Iain’s number is 806210, and he was
born on 21 June 1980. Between them they
thought they understood how the digits
were selected and arranged, and correctly
predicted Fred’s six-digit number, knowing
that he was born on 17 March 1981.

208 Unit 5 Advanced problem solving

a (i) What was Fred’s number?
[1]
(ii) A
 lthough they could make this
prediction knowing the numbers
and dates of birth of both Iain and
Jeremy, they could not be sure how
the numbers were constructed by
just looking at the number and date
of birth of only one of them. Why
not?[1]
(iii) Give an example of a date of birth
which would have been sufficient on
its own to make this prediction with
confidence.[1]
	Emma pointed out that it must be a
more complicated system than Jeremy
thought, as her number is 662126,
and her (female) friend Jocelyn has
752232.

J eremy, knowing that Emma’s birthday is
12 December, correctly suggested that this
is because a specific number was added
to one of the digits for females.
b (i)	How much is added, and to
which digit?
[2]
(ii) What is Jocelyn’s date of birth?[1]
c Although never implemented, the
authorities considered identifying
people who had been born outside
Great Britain by using a similar system
to that which identifies gender.
		Give an example of how this could have
been done, within the six digits, without
losing any of the existing information. [1]
d Sometimes people tried to use the
driving licence of one of their parents.
		Given that a police officer can estimate
a person’s age to within ten years,
what is the chance that the deception
would be noticed from looking at the
person and the number on the driving
licence?[1]
e Using a random number for making
a fake licence for a male, what is the
probability that it would fail to give a
valid month and date (ignoring
the year)?
[2]
Cambridge International A & AS Level Thinking
Skills 9694/31 Paper 3 Q2 May/June 2011

2 Fastrack runs a non-stop express service
between Aaland and Matsberg, which
takes 40 minutes. Stagebus offers a
stopping service between the same two
towns, serving three intermediate villages
an equal distance apart.

		 The Stagebus stops for 5 minutes at
each village and takes 1 hour 15 minutes
from leaving Matsberg to arriving at Aaland.
		 The first Fastrack bus in the morning
leaves Aaland at 8 a.m., and the first
Stagebus leaves Matsberg at 7.45 a.m.
		 At what time do they pass each other
(to the nearest minute)?
 8.10   B 8.16   C 8.20  
A
D 8.24   E 8.26
3 There are four teams in the netball league
on the island of Naldia. In a season, they
play each other once. Three points are
awarded for a win, one for a draw and none
for a loss. At the end of the season, the
points were as follows:
Dunrovia
Arbadia		
Brindling
Crittle		

6
4
4
2

a How many matches were drawn?
b What was the result of the match
between Dunrovia and Crittle?
c If Brindling beat Dunrovia, can you
determine the results of all the matches?
4 Andy, Benita and Chico went out for a meal
together. When the bill came, they thought
they would divide it equally between them.
However, Chico admitted to having chosen
more expensive dishes and noticed that
his total was $3 more than the amount he
would have paid if they split it equally.
		 If Andy and Benita’s bills were $12
individually, how much was Chico’s?

5.1 Combining skills – using imagination  209

5 Fatima is making a quilt. The overall size is
1.7 m × 2.0 m. It will have a pattern of 6 × 5
patchwork squares in the middle and an
equal border all the way around as shown.

6 Bill, Harry and Fred run a gardening
business. Bill pays all the annual fixed
costs (insurance, telephone line rental,
etc.) by instalments, which amount to
$400 per week. Harry buys the materials
for any job they do. Fred collects the
payment for jobs. They split all profits
evenly and settle up after every job
is completed. They have just done a
landscaping and re-fencing job for
Mrs Keane that took the three of them
exactly two weeks. Materials cost $1400
and Mrs Keane paid Fred $4900.
		 How much does Fred owe Bill and
Harry?
Answers and comments are on pages 326–27.

	What size should the patchwork
squares be?

210 Unit 5 Advanced problem solving

5.2 Developing models
In Chapter 3.11 we looked at how models can
be used by governments, industry and so on to
carry out ‘what if?’ analyses and look at how
changes to an environment can affect various
factors. In this chapter, modelling is taken
further. Questions may involve the application
of more complex models or the development of
a model for a given situation. In the longer,
multiple question items which may be
encountered in A Level examinations or some
admissions tests, the individual questions
usually increase in complexity, either by asking
for a deeper analysis or by introducing new
situations or conditions.
The activities in this section are progressive,
starting with the application of a model which
is provided and progressing through simple
linear models to the development of a nonlinear model. The final activity is harder than
those that would be encountered in an A Level
examination and will be useful for those
intending to take university admissions tests or
those wishing to prepare themselves better by
tackling harder questions. Candidates will
find a range of questions of appropriate
difficulty in past papers.
The first example shows how models can be
useful in real situations.

The equation below is a very simplistic
mathematical model for a fish farm. It is called
the Beverton–Holt model and considers the
effect of various reproduction rates and the
maximum capacity of the farm.
nt +1 =

Rnt
(1 + nt ( R − 1) / K )

For the non-mathematical, this equation may
look rather frightening, but don’t worry, we
are not going to do any hard algebra and the
examples you will encounter in examinations
will use much simpler mathematics.
In the equation, R is the reproduction rate
(R = 1.5 means the population, if unlimited,
would rise by 50% every year – this allows for
both births and deaths). K is the maximum
capacity of the fish farm. nt is the population in
the current year and nt + 1 the population in the
next year. We can try putting some numbers
into this equation and looking at what
happens. We assume that the initial population
(n0) is 1000 fish and the maximum capacity is
10,000 (beyond this the fish would die of
starvation or overcrowding), then look at how
the population increases year by year for three
different values of R. The results are shown in
the graph below:

12,000

Population

10,000
8000
R = 1.5
R = 2.0
R = 2.5

6000
4000
2000
0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25
Year

5.2 Developing models 211

We can see that the maximum capacity is
reached in 10–15 years and the time to reach
maximum capacity reduces as the
reproduction rate increases. This is exactly
what we would expect.
Now what happens if we do some fishing?
We will look at the case where R = 1.5 and we
remove various amounts of fish each year,
from year 5 on (we can do this by simply
subtracting f fish from the stock for each year
in the calculation we carried out based on the
Beverton–Holt equation). The results are
shown below for annual removal rates of 500,
550 and 600 fish.
We now begin to see how useful such
models can be. The population is very
sensitive to the amount of fishing: 500 per
year is sustainable; 550 leads to a catastrophic
drop in the stocks after 12 years. Although this
model is not totally realistic, it gives an insight
into how models can be of commercial value.
For those who are comfortable with the
equation and spreadsheets, it is easy to play
with the parameters of this model and carry
out exactly the sort of ‘what if?’ analysis we
mentioned before.
As an additional activity you might
consider alternative fishing strategies: for

example, waiting longer before starting to fish
or taking a percentage of the population
rather than a fixed number of fish.
The modelling problems described in
Chapter 3.11 involved choosing the correct
model of a given situation. More advanced
modelling questions such as may be
encountered in A2 Level examinations (e.g.
Cambridge Thinking Skills Paper 3 or BMAT
Paper 1) can require the solver to use a model
to draw conclusions or actually to develop a
mathematical model for a given situation and
make inferences from the model derived.
Some of the problems we have already seen are
in this category, but the model is so simple
that you are usually unaware that you are
using it. For example, the activity in Chapter 3.5
about Petra’s electricity involved recognising
that the bill, made up of a fixed monthly
charge and an amount per unit, could be
represented by:
cost = fixed charge + u × units used
where u is the charge per unit. This equation is
a simple mathematical model.
The following is an example that leads to a
model which requires only relatively simple
mathematics.

9000
8000

Population

7000
6000
f = 500
f = 550
f = 600

5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10111213141516171819202122232425
Year

212 Unit 5 Advanced problem solving

Activity

Activity

Perfect Pots is a company making decorative
plant pots. Its overheads (rent on premises,
insurance, etc.) are $15,000 per year. There
are four administrative staff (manager,
accountant, sales director and secretary)
earning a total of $85,000 per year. The pots
are made by a number of skilled workers;
each can produce up to 5000 pots a year and
earns $20,000 per year. Materials, power and
so on cost $1000 per 10,000 pots.
How will the company’s profits vary with
the number of pots made and sold and the
selling price of the pots (assuming the
company only makes pots to supply orders)?

Greenfinger Garden Services (GGS) offer a
range of garden maintenance tasks, including
lawn maintenance. They charge one rate per
square metre for mowing lawns and a different
rate per linear metre for trimming the edges.
1 Germaine has a rectangular lawn 5 m by
4 m. GGS have been charging him $42
for mowing and trimming the edges of
his lawn. He now wants to put a 2 m by
2 m flower bed in the middle of his lawn,
and has asked GGS how much the lawn
maintenance charge will be when he has
done this. The new lawn is shown below:
Flower bed

Commentary

4m

The model depends on the number of workers,
and it must be remembered that each one
cannot produce more than 5000 pots per year.
The mathematics of this model are quite
simple, depending only on multiplication,
addition and subtraction. If the number of
workers is n, the number of pots produced and
sold is m and the selling price per pot is p, the
profit can be calculated as follows:
Income = mp
Expenditure = 100,000 + 20,000n +
1000m
10, 000
Profit = mp – 100,000 – 20,000n –

m
10

The table on the next page shows how this varies,
assuming the number of workers employed is
controlled by the number of pots produced.
This type of model is useful to the
accountant and sales director in producing
sales targets. This also leads to the type of
‘what if?’ analysis that is commonly used in
economics. Note that there are points at
which selling extra pots means employing an
extra worker, which can lead to a fall in profits.
The next activity requires the creation of a
relatively simple model and is a good
introduction to modelling.

2m
2m
5m

GGS have quoted $51 for mowing and
trimming the edges on his new lawn.
By how much has the edge length been
increased on the new lawn?
2 In order to run their business efficiently,
GGS need a general method for calculating
the amount they will charge for other sizes
or shapes of lawn. Develop a formula or
general rule for calculating the charge for
any shaped lawn (assuming it has rightangled corners).
3 They have been asked to quote for a new
job. They have measured the lawn and it is
shown in the diagram below. What would
be the charge for this lawn?
8m

8m

3m
4m

5.2 Developing models 213

Selling price per pot ($)
10

12

14

16

Annual production

Workers employed

1000

1

–110,100

–108,100

–106,100

–104,100

2000

1

–100,200

–96,200

–92,200

–88,200

3000

1

–90,300

–84,300

–78,300

–72,300

4000

1

–80,400

–72,400

–64,400

–56,400

5000

1

–70,500

–60,500

–50,500

–40,500

6000

2

–80,600

–68,600

–56,600

–44,600

7000

2

–70,700

–56,700

–42,700

–28,700

8000

2

–60,800

–44,800

–28,800

–12,800

9000

2

–50,900

–32,900

–14,900

3100

10,000

2

–41,000

–21,000

–1000

19,000

11,000

3

–51,100

–29,100

–7100

14,900

12,000

3

–41,200

–17,200

6800

30,800

13,000

3

–31,300

–5,300

20,700

46,700

14,000

3

–21,400

6600

34,600

62,600

15,000

3

–11,500

18,500

48,500

78,500

16,000

4

–21,600

10,400

42,400

74,400

17,000

4

–11,700

22,300

56,300

90,300

18,000

4

–1800

34,200

70,200

106,200

19,000

4

8100

46,100

84,100

122,100

20,000

4

18,000

58,000

98,000

138,000

214 Unit 5 Advanced problem solving

Profit ($)

Commentary

calculated, so the model which was
developed above must now be applied
to the new situation. The area of the lawn
shown (calculated as the surrounding
rectangle minus the cut-out) is 8 m ×
8 m – 4 m × 3 m = 64 m2 – 12 m2 = 52 m2.
The length of the edge is the same as the
surrounding rectangle, so is 2 × (8 m + 8 m)
= 32 m. The GGS cost for maintenance
would be:

This is quite a simple and common model.
Those familiar with simultaneous equations
will probably recognise the style of the
question.
1	
This question changes the original
conditions and simple length/area
calculations are required. Before the
modification, the lawn was quite simple
with an area of 5 m × 4 m = 20 m2 and an
edge length of 2 × (5 m + 4 m) = 18 m.
	After modification, the lawn area has
been reduced by 2 m × 2 m = 4 m2 and
the edge length increased by 2 ×
(2 m + 2 m) = 8 m. This answers the first
question. The new area is 16 m2 and the
new edge length is 26 m.
2	
Candidates are now asked to develop
a general model for the rates to be
charged in GGS's business. We know
that there are two prices; we will say that
the cost per square metre for mowing is
a and the cost per linear metre for edge
trimming is e.

52 × 0.75 + 32 × 1.5 = 39 + 48 = $87
The question above led to a linear model in that
all the prices depended only on sums of the
prices multiplied by the relevant areas or
lengths. The activity below is non-linear so is a
little more complicated mathematically but can
be handled by similar methods and should not
be beyond those with a grasp of simple algebra.

Activity
A garden water feature is shown below.

We can construct two simple equations:
Before modification:
After modification:

20a + 18e = 42
16a + 26e = 51

b
a

These can be solved using standard methods,
or by trial and improvement, to give:
a = 0.75 and e = 1.50
These are the prices of the two services in
dollars: $0.75 per square metre for
mowing and $1.50 per linear metre for
trimming edges.
This answers the second question: the
cost formula is 0.75A + 1.50L, where A is
the lawn area and L is the edge length.
We can alternatively express this in
words, as $0.75 per square metre of lawn
plus $1.50 per metre of edge.
3	
The third question introduces a further
new lawn and askes for the cost to be

The base of the tank is a 20 cm × 25 cm
rectangle and it is fed at a constant rate of
10 litres per minute. The tank fills until the
depth is b, as shown in the diagram, then
water flows to the fountain until the depth
falls below a, when the exit flow stops. The
cycle is then repeated. When the tank is
emptying (with water running in at the same
time), it loses 1 4 of the height of water every
minute. (You can assume that, during each
minute, the fall in height is linear.)

5.2 Developing models 215

1 Starting from completely empty, how
long does it take until the tank starts
discharging?
2 When the pipe to the fountain starts
discharging, how much water flows out in
the first minute?
3 Sketch a graph showing the flow out of
the tank against time for a = 20 cm and
b = 80 cm. Show more than one cycle.
Assume the tank is empty at time 0.

Commentary
This question is progressive, like most
longer modelling questions. Starting with a
relatively simply calculation, the candidate is
expected to develop and apply the model in
increasingly difficult ways. This question is
harder than those candidates would expect to
meet in an A Level examination.
There are some relatively simple calculations
which are necessary first in order to calculate
the cycle times. It is important to take care
to work in consistent units – in this case
centimetres, square centimetres and litres
(1000 cubic centimetres) are convenient.
1 The tank has a cross-sectional area of
20 × 25 = 500 square centimetres and
fills at 10 litres per minute. 1 litre is
1000 cubic centimetres, so the tank fills
at 10, 000 cm per minute or 20 cm per
500
minute. Thus it will fill to height b in b 20
minutes (with b in cm).
2 We are told that in the first minute, the
tank will lose 1 4 of its height, so from
b to 0.75b. The volume it will lose is
0.25b × 500
litres (the factor of 1000
1000
changes cubic cm to litres), or 0.125b litres
(again with b in cm). However, in this
time there is an inflow of 10 litres, so the
actual outflow will be 0.125b + 10 litres.
	When doing a calculation like this, it
is very easy to get carried away with

216 Unit 5 Advanced problem solving

the difficult bits and forget something
simple – in this case that the drop in level
allowed for the inflow occurring. It is
always important to read carefully both
the information given and the question,
to be sure of exactly what is required.
3 We know that there is no flow from time
zero to time b 20 (as calculated in
question 1). This is 80 20 minutes or
4 minutes. We can now calculate the
height at the end of each minute. At
4 minutes, the height is 80 cm. At
5 minutes, it is 60 cm (it has lost 1 4
of its height). The remainder of the
calculations down to a height of 20 cm
are shown below. (These can easily be
done with a calculator.)
Time
(min)

0

4

5

6

7

8

9

Height 0 80 60 45 33.75 25.31 18.98
(cm)

	The flow will stop when the height drops
to 20 cm. Assuming the drop in height is
linear over the last minute, it will reach
20 cm from 25.31 cm in:
(25.31 − 20.00)
(25.31 − 18.98)
=

5.31
6.33

	= 0.84 minutes
	We could now calculate the outflow
of water through the fountain during
each minute. For example from 5 to
6 minutes, there is a drop in height of
15 cm, meaning a loss in volume in the
15 × 500
tank of
= 7.5 litres. However,
1000
in this time 10 litres has flowed in, so
the flow rate (the volume flowing out
per unit time) to the fountain has been
17.5 litres per minute. Repeating these
calculations for each minute would allow

(1.00 + 0.75) = 0.875 times that at the
2
start of the minute. In the example
above, where the loss in volume from
minute 5 to minute 6 was 7.5 litres, we
can say that the flow rate at the start of
7.5
the minute was
= 8.57 litres per
0.875
minute and the flow rate at the start of
minute 6 was 3 4 of this or 6.43 litres per
minute. To this we must always add the
10 litres per minute flowing in, so the
actual values at the start of these two
minutes would be 18.57 and 16.43 litres
per minute.
		 We can now repeat these calculations
for each minute (remembering that
during the periods from when the height
has fallen to 20 cm to when it recovers
to 80 cm the flow rate is zero). We may
also calculate the flow rate just before
the flow stops by using the method from
the paragraph above, but remembering
that the flow stops at 8.84 minutes. The
results are shown in the table and graph
below. This graph is what was required in
the original question.

Time (minutes)

Flow rate (litres per minute)

0

0

4

0

4

21.43

5

18.57

6

16.43

7

14.82

8

13.62

8.84

12.86

8.84

0

12.84

0

12.84

21.43

13.84

18.57

14.84

16.43

15.84

14.82

16.84

13.62

17.68

12.86

17.68

0

25
Flow rate (litres/min)

us to produce a graph of sorts. However,
you may be able to see that we could not
draw a point showing the flow rate at
exactly 4 minutes, only the approximate
flow rate at 4.5 minutes. The next step, to
produce a more accurate graph, requires
some clear thinking (but no particularly
difficult mathematics) and is the sort of
step which might help improve marks in
an A Level examination question.
		 The height at the end of each minute
is 3 4 that at the start of the minute.
We are told that we may approximate
linearly during each minute, so the
height after half a minute is

20
15
10
5
0

0

2

4

6

8 10 12 14 16 18 20
Time (min)

5.2 Developing models 217

Summary
• We have seen how models can be
developed for a variety of situations that
allow the prediction of what will happen if
certain variables change.
• A model can be used to carry out ‘what if?’
analyses.
• When answering more complex questions,
it is important to remember what is

required and to reread the material and
question if necessary to check that all
the important information has been
incorporated.
• In order to get better marks in higher-level
examinations, it may be necessary to do
extra work and to think carefully to improve
the quality of the answer.

End-of-chapter assignments
(A calculator or computer spreadsheet will be
useful for these assignments.)
1 Duane and Mervin are going to town, a
distance of 12 km. They have only one bike
between them, so they decide that one
should ride a certain distance while the
other walks. The cyclist will then leave the
bike by the side of the track for the walker
to pick up when he arrives, and continue
on foot. The walker will then ride the same
distance; and they will repeat the process
until they get to town. Duane rides at
15 km/h and walks at 6 km/h. Mervin
rides at 20 km/h and walks at 4 km/h.
		 How long does it take until they both
reach town if they use the best strategy?
		 If you have time, you may consider
what would happen if they cycle different
distances: can the time for them both to
arrive in town be improved?
2 Study the information below and answer
the questions. Show your working.
	Large blocks of stone can be moved by
‘rolling’ them. The diagram below shows
how a single stone can be moved in
this way.

218 Unit 5 Advanced problem solving

start

one 360º revolution

nish

	It is quicker to lower a tall stone than to
raise it. From experience, a stonemason
knows that he can turn a stone through 90°
in (b h) minutes, where b is the length of the
face that is flat on the ground, and h is the
vertical height of the stone as he is about to
turn it.
		 For example, a block that has two of
its dimensions as 5 metres and 2 metres
can be turned 180° in (5 2) minutes + (2 5)
minutes = 2 minutes 54 seconds.
		 The stonemason wishes to move large
blocks of stone, in order to then cut them
into manageable pieces for tombstones.
He is considering how to move them most
quickly.
		 In order to move a block, he chooses the
initial orientation, and then rolls it in the
same direction for the whole journey.

	He will only consider blocks that are cuboid
in shape and have dimensions that are
whole numbers of metres.

3 (Harder task) A motor race consists
of 60 laps of 5 km each. Some of the
specifications for the Marlin team car are as
follows:

a Consider a block with dimensions
2 m × 2 m × 6 m. Calculate the minimum
	fuel consumption: 1 litre/km
possible time that it would take to
	fuel tank capacity: 160 litres
roll the block through 360°.
[1] 	refuel rate: 15 litres/second
b Consider a block with dimensions
	pit stop time: 10 seconds plus time to refuel
1 m × 4 m × 6 m. Calculate all the
	average speed (no fuel): 75 seconds/lap
different possible distances that the
	speed with fuel: 0.12 seconds slower/lap
block could travel in one 360° revolution,
for each 5 litres of fuel carried
according to the different initial
	It may be seen that the car cannot carry
orientations.[1]
enough fuel to complete the race without a
c If a 24 m3 block is to travel at least
pit stop. However, the car goes more slowly
610 m, what is the smallest possible
the more fuel it carries. The fuel gauge is
number of 90° turns that will be needed?
very accurate, so it can effectively be run
down to zero before refuelling. (Hint: in
order to calculate the average lap time for
each section you may use the average fuel
610 m
load. Assume the race is broken into equal
[3]
distances between pit stops.)
d What dimensions for a 24 m3 block
		 How many pit stops should the car make
will allow for the smallest possible
to complete the race in the fastest possible
time to move it 610 m? State the time
time – 1, 2 or 3?
it will take, to the nearest minute.
[4]
4 A shop sells three types of nuts:
	He decides that he needs 61 m3 of stone
Brazil nuts: 80¢/kg
for the next season. He can only move
walnuts: 70¢/kg
a maximum of 24 m3 at a time. It takes
hazelnuts: 40¢/kg
5 minutes for him to return the 610 m
	The shopkeeper makes 50% profit on each
distance without a stone.
type of nut. She wishes to sell mixed nuts
e Show that it is possible for him to move
at 60¢ per kg. What proportion should the
exactly 61 m3 of stone in less
mix of the three nuts be if she is to make
than 500 minutes.
[4]
50% profit on the mixed nuts? Is there one
f He realises that by transporting more
answer or a range of answers? If so, which
than 61 m3 of stone in total, he can reduce
contains the most even mix of nuts?
the overall amount of time. However, he
Can you generalise the result?
does not want to move any more than
Answers and comments are on pages 327–30.
70 m3 or there will be too much waste.
What set of block sizes should he move
to minimise his total time?
[2]
Cambridge International A & AS Level Thinking
Skills 9694/31 Paper 3 Q3 May/June 2011

5.2 Developing models 219

5.3 Carrying out investigations
An investigation is a problem where a set of
information is given and the student is asked
to consider various scenarios, either to find
which is the best, or just to consider the results
of various options. Investigations are closely
related to modelling, in that a model may be
developed to help with the investigation.
Alternatively, a set of rules may be formulated
which determine a set of possibilities. Some
investigations can be quite open-ended,

meaning some students will be able to take
problems further, extract more detail,
illustrate the results better and so on.
The example below is investigative: you
have to consider various options and their
effect on the result. It uses the skills of spatial
reasoning and searching. Investigation
questions can use any of the skill types covered
in Unit 3 or any combinations of them.

Activity
A company making decorative wall tiles is
introducing a new range and their designer
has decided to base them on a 2 × 2 grid
system so they can be fitted together in
various combinations. She has decided to
make all possible tiles that can be created by
choosing half of one edge (starting from a
corner) and joining this to any other half-edge
on the tile, filling in the enclosed area with
colour. The tile below is one example.
1

2

8

3

7

4
6

The entire set of tiles consists of all
combinations excluding any which may be
rotated into each other; so, for example, the
two options shown below (1 connected to 5
and 3 connected to 7) are the same tile.

5

The eight half-edges of the tiles are
numbered 1 to 8 on the diagram above and
any one may be joined to any other. In this
case, half-edge 1 is joined to half-edge 5.

220 Unit 5 Advanced problem solving

Reflections which result in different tiles are
included in the set. The set includes halfedge 1 joined to itself, which will be a blank
white tile.
How many different tiles are there in the
set?
Make a symmetrical 4 × 4 pattern of tiles
which includes at least one of each and with
colours matching at all joining edges.

Commentary
It is possible to count the maximum number of
tiles that there could be. Half-edge 1 could be
connected to itself or any of the other seven
half-edges. (Note that the blank tile is equivalent
to connecting a half-edge to itself or the adjacent
half-edge on the same side of the square.)
Half-edge 2 could be connected to any other
than half-edge 1 and itself (both of which we
have already counted). Thus, we must
investigate 7 + 6 possibilities. Beyond this,
looking at connections from half-edges 3, 4 etc.
all will produce rotations of those already found.
The full set of 13 possibilities is illustrated
below. The numbers below the tiles give a
successive count of new ones. Where it says,
for example, ‘= 2’, this means that the tile is
equivalent (i.e. can be rotated into) tile 2.

1

2

3

4

5

=2

6

=6

7

=5

8

=3

There are eight distinguishably different tiles
in total.
One symmetrical 4 × 4 pattern is shown
below. There are many others. Remember that
the colours must match at the edges.

As an additional activity, you might look at all
similar tiles which join two one-third-edges
instead of half-edges, an example of which is
shown below. There are not so many of these
to make the problem too long, but it will take a
little more care to identify all the different
ones. To start with, how many options do you
need to look at?

=7

5.3 Carrying out investigations 221

Activity
I mow my lawn (as shown in the diagram)
using a push-along mower. My speed when
mowing is 1 m/s. My mower cuts a strip
0.5 m wide. When I reach the edge, I must
turn the mower around. If I turn it through
90° it takes me 5 seconds; if I turn it through
180° it takes me 8 seconds. Every 30 m,
I need to empty the grass box, which takes
1 minute. Each time I start a stretch, I must
start 1 m into the lawn (as I don’t want to
stand in the flower beds), but I can mow right
to the edge in front of me. I only mow in
straight lines.
12 m
4m
8m

8m

There are various strategies I can use. I can
do it all side-to-side or top to bottom (in both
cases remembering to cover any bits I may
miss by starting 1 m inside the edges).
Alternatively, I can go right round the outside,
then do the next strip in, and so on until I get
to the centre.
How long will it take me using the best
strategy?

Commentary
This is a realistic problem and requires both
data-processing and a search (of possible
strategies). In cases like this, it is not always
possible to be absolutely sure that you have
found the optimum – but the investigative
process will often make the best strategy clear.
We consider only one possibility here; you
should go on to look at others for yourself.

222 Unit 5 Advanced problem solving

The overall area of the lawn (calculated as
the surrounding rectangle minus the cutout) is 96 m2 − 16 m2 = 80 m2. This means
that, regardless of the strategy, I will need to
empty the grass box six times (once every
30 m for a mower 0.5 m wide). This takes
6 minutes.
Using the side-to-side strategy: If I start in
the bottom-left corner, each strip on the short
section will be 7 m long (starting 1 m inside
the lawn). Since the mower cuts a strip 0.5 m
wide, the lawn width of 4 m for this section
requires 8 strips – making 56 m in total (56
seconds). I will make 8 × 180° turns taking 64
seconds (the last turn makes me ready to do
the long section). So this section of the lawn
takes 56 seconds + 64 seconds = 2 minutes.
The long section will take 11 m × 8 strips =
88 m (88 seconds) and 7 × 180° turns (56
seconds). The total time for this section is 88
seconds + 56 seconds = 2 minutes 24 seconds.
I must now consider the bits I left by
starting inside the edge. The left-hand edge is
easy, as I am now at the top-left corner. To do
this, I do a 90° turn and mow the 7 m back to
the start, which takes 5 + 7 = 12 seconds. The
mown strip was only 0.5 m wide, so I must do
it again, 0.5 m in from the edge, involving
another 180° turn and 7 m mowing: 8 + 7 = 15
seconds. The total is 27 seconds.
The bits I missed on the right-hand edges
are more complicated. There are two 4 m
sections. It is most efficient to mow these
when I get there. When I get to the bottomright (after the first strip) I do a 90° turn (5
seconds), mow 3 m, make another 180° turn
(8 seconds) and mow 3 m back. I then need to
turn 90° (5 seconds) to be ready for the next
strip. (Note that this saved me one 180° turn
in the first section). This takes me 5 + 3 + 8 +
3 + 5 − 8 = 16 seconds (the −8 is for the time
saved on the first turn).
The top-right 4 m strip will take exactly the
same time (if done after the first long strip): 16
seconds.

The total time taken is:
short section: 2 minutes
long section: 2 minutes 24 seconds
left edge: 27 seconds
right edges: 2 × 16 = 32 seconds
emptying grass box: 6 minutes
Total: 11 minutes 23 seconds
You should now be able to convince yourself
(without doing much more work) whether
the up-and-down method would be better or
worse. This leaves only the round-and-round,
or spiral, method to investigate – you can do
this for yourself.
This exercise was surprisingly complicated:
it required quite a lot of calculation and
needed great care, both in deciding the order
of actions and arithmetically. This is typical of
investigative problems, in real life as well as in
examinations.

Summary
• We have seen that investigations are
closely related to models.
• In an investigation, we are not required
to develop a mathematical model,
although one may be used as part of the
investigation.
• An investigation will usually require a
search to be made of possibilities, which
may sometimes lead to the identification of
a maximum or minimum.
• Investigations, like models, can be openended. In this case it is important to
concentrate on lines which lead to the
required answer rather than following all
possible paths.

5.3 Carrying out investigations 223

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Coins in most of the world’s currencies are
based on a decimal system, the individual
coins (below $1) being, for example, 1¢,
2¢, 5¢, 10¢, 20¢ and 50¢ (some may
also include a 25¢ coin). Consider a single
transaction to buy one item.
a Starting from a purchase worth 1¢, up
to what amount can such a transaction
be carried out using only one or two
coins? This could involve the purchaser
paying the exact amount with two coins,
or the purchaser offering one coin and
receiving one as change (for example,
an item costing 3¢ can be purchased
by offering a 5¢ coin and receiving a 2¢
coin in change).
b Can you develop an alternative coin
system which uses relatively few
coins but can make a big range of
values using only one or two coins?
For example, consider a coin system
starting with 1¢, 3¢, 5¢ and so on.
This investigation is potentially openended, but practicality will limit the area
of search (note that a system starting
with 2¢, 5¢, 9¢ could not even do a
transaction for 1¢ using two coins).
2 A fruit-seller displays his oranges in square
boxes which take a whole number of
oranges on each side. The bottom layer
fills the box and higher layers are placed by

putting oranges in the ‘dimples’ in the layer
below until no more layers can be made.
This is shown below left for a box of
16 (4 × 4) oranges on the bottom layer.
	Clearly a 2 × 2 box would contain 5 oranges
(4 on the bottom and 1 above). How many
oranges would a 5 × 5 box contain? Can
you generalise for any square box?
		 What would happen with a rectangular
box? Start with a box containing 4 × 5
oranges on the bottom layer. Can you
develop rules which would allow you to
calculate the number of oranges stacked
in any rectangular box?
3 Milly is running a game at her school fête
to raise money for the school. Her idea is
to get people to throw two dice. The players
pay $1 per game and they win $2 if the two
numbers they throw differ by more than 2.
		 If 200 people play the game, how much
money will she expect to raise?
		 She is worried that people may be able
to calculate the odds for this game easily,
and that this may discourage them from
playing. What alternative criteria could
she consider for a win? What about, for
example, the product of the numbers on
the two dice or the two values written as
a two-digit number (e.g. 2 and 5 become
25)? In each case you think of, work out
the criterion for a win to ensure that she
makes a similar profit to that calculated
above. Look at these and any other
possibilities you may think of, calculating
the odds of winning for different rules.
You could also play the game as a class
activity and see whether the experimental
odds match the calculated value.
Answers and comments are on page 330.

224 Unit 5 Advanced problem solving

5.4 Data analysis and inference
We saw in Chapter 3.8 that problems
involving making inferences from data or
suggesting reasons for the nature of the data
may appear in either the critical thinking or
the problem-solving sections of thinking
skills examinations. In this type of question
for thinking skills examinations at AS Level
and those using short questions, the nature
of the data is usually presented explicitly and
little analysis is required. This chapter deals
with longer questions which may appear in
Cambridge A2 examinations, BMAT Paper 1
and AQA Unit 2.
Data analysis may be carried out for a
number of reasons and using a wide variety of
methods. Some data is collected to investigate
a hypothesis or to make decisions on a course
of action (for example, will reducing a speed
limit reduce road accidents?). Other data is
collected as routine and analysis may be much
more open-ended, to try to discover patterns
and trends.
Examination questions normally use several
of the skills introduced in Unit 3. Data
selection and processing are obvious, but
searching and suggesting hypotheses for
variation are also central to this analysis. This
type of question does not cover statistical
significance finding, but the search for
patterns in complex data is an important part
of problem solving. The following
introductory example uses relatively simple
data to illustrate some of the techniques used.

Activity
The table below shows class sizes in publicly
funded elementary schools.
Percentage of pupils by
class size

Average
class size

Year

<19
pupils

19–25
pupils

>25
pupils

2006

12.7

50.7

36.6

23.6

2007

15.3

58.9

25.8

22.8

2008

15.5

62.6

21.9

22.6

2009

16.1

62.9

21.0

22.5

2010

21.6

53.6

24.8

22.4

2011

20.2

56.7

23.2

22.5

Summary Statistics for Schools in Scotland 2011

1 Draw a graph showing how the percentage
of pupils in each class size has varied over
the period shown. Express what is shown
by this graph in a few short sentences.
2 The table shows the percentage of pupils
in classes of the size shown. If we assume
that the average class size of classes with
less than 19 pupils is 10 and the average
for classes over 25 is 30, what are the
percentages of actual classes for the three
sizes in 2011?
3 The average class sizes have remained
constant over the period shown but there
have been significant changes in the
proportions of pupils in the various sizes
of class. How is this possible?

5.4 Data analysis and inference 225

Commentary
This exercise asks three quite clear questions
which can be answered by analysing the data
in the table in an appropriate manner.
1 The graph is shown below.

<19: 26.5%
19–25: 48.1%
>25: 25.4%

Percentage of pupils

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2006

2007

<19 pupils

2008 2009
Year
19–25 pupils

2010

2011

>25 pupils

	This shows the percentage of pupils
in larger classes to have fallen over the
period shown, and the percentage of
pupils in smaller classes to have risen.
This also means that (unless the total
number of pupils has fallen dramatically)
the number of pupils in smaller classes
must have risen at the expense of the
number of pupils in larger classes.
2 Taking the 2011 figures, we can assume
1000 children in total (it is easier to work
with numbers rather than percentages).
We then have 202 children in classes
averaging 10 each, or 20.2 classes; 567
children in classes averaging 22 each, or
25.8 classes; and 232 children in classes
averaging 30 each, or 7.7 classes. This is
a total of 20.2 + 25.8 + 7.7 = 53.7 classes.
The percentages are 37.6% of classes with
under 19 pupils; 48.0% of classes with
19–25 pupils; and 14.3% of classes with
over 25 pupils.
3 Using the calculations for question 2, we
have a total of 20.2 + 25.8 + 7.7 = 53.7
classes for 1000 pupils, or an average
class size of 18.6 children. This is lower
than the quoted average in the table,
presumably because the estimated sizes

226 Unit 5 Advanced problem solving

of classes in each category in question 2
were wrong. Similar calculations for 2006
give percentages for each class size as
follows:

with an average class size of 20.9.
		 This shows that the number of classes
in the middle size range has stayed
relatively constant, whilst the number of
larger classes has shrunk and the number
of smaller classes increased, leaving the
overall average relatively constant.
Longer questions at A Level can involve
analysing quite complex data and
determining what conclusions may be drawn
from it. The activity below is of this type.

Activity
The graph shows which types of charities in
the UK benefit from donations from individual
members of the general public. The total
amount donated to charities by individuals
was estimated to be £11 billion.
0

10

20

Medical research

17

Hospitals

11

Children

11

Animal

6

Disabled
Homeless
Elderly

3
5

Schools

4
5
3
3
2
1
1

Sports
Arts

14
16

9
8

Health
Environment

11

4
3

17

13

Religious

26
24

10

Overseas

30

7
7

UK Giving 2011, NCVO

Proportion of people
who donate %
Proportion of total
amount %

40
38

The sources of all income for medical
charities are shown in the pie chart.
Internally
generated 26%
Voluntary
sector 7%

or £1.87 billion. The pie chart shows
that individuals contribute 61% of all
donations to medical research charities,
so the total donations must amount to
= £3.07 billion.

Individuals
61%

Private
sector 2%
Public
sector 4%

Answer the following questions and give brief
explanations of your answers.
1 For which type of charity do individuals
donate the largest average amount?
2 For which type of charity do individuals
donate the smallest average amount?
3 What is the estimated total income of
medical research charities?
4 It has been stated elsewhere that 6%
of charities receive 90% of the total
income, yet medical research, the largest
beneficiary, accounts for 17% of donations.
Explain this.

Commentary
1 The bar chart shows the percentage of
people who donate and the percentage
of total donations. Thus the type of
charity with the highest proportion of
donations relative to the proportion of
people contributing will get the highest
average donation and vice versa. On this
basis, the charity type receiving the
highest average contribution is religious
organisations (the only one for which the
percentage of total donations exceeds
the percentage of people contributing).
2 The charity type with the lowest average
donation is homeless (3 : 1 ratio). The
only other charity type approaching this
is disabled (approximately 2.75 : 1).
3 Individual donations to medical research
charities amount to 17% of £11 billion,

4 This is explained by the fact that a small
number of charities receive very large
incomes: there will be a large number
of medical research charities, some of
which will be very small so will not
contribute to the 6%, that receive 90%
of the income. The 6% will be made up
of a small number of charities in the top
few categories. In the lower parts of the
chart, there will be a huge number of
very specialised charities receiving very
small incomes. The numbers on the
chart do not relate to the numbers of
charities, only to the proportions.
One final repeated warning: correlation does
not always mean cause and effect. Sometimes
two variables appear to correlate, but one does
not lead to the other. The correlation may be
coincidental, a statistical fluke, or both
observations may be caused by a third factor.
One classic example is that there is a close
correlation between ice cream sales and deaths
due to drowning. It would be ridiculous to say
that either of these is a cause of the other. In
fact, they both increase during hot weather.
Many similar examples can be found.

Summary
• Complex data sets have been introduced
which require a range of skills to analyse.
• We have seen that it is necessary to
process data – grouping, averaging and so
on – and sometimes to graph data in order
to identify patterns and trends which may
be used to draw conclusions.
• We have seen that extended examples where
more data is supplied can require analysis
that may lead to a range of conclusions.

5.4 Data analysis and inference 227

End-of-chapter assignments
1 The graphs show estimates of world fossil
fuel reserves, world energy consumption
and regional energy consumption by fuel
source.
Fossil fuel reserves
Proved reserves divided by annual consumption

Potential years of supply

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
19
80
19
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00
20
02
20
04
20
06
20
08
20
10

0

14000

Gas

World energy consumption

12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0

19
8
19 0
8
19 2
8
19 4
8
19 6
8
19 8
9
19 0
92
19
9
19 4
9
19 6
9
20 8
0
20 0
0
20 2
0
20 4
0
20 6
0
20 8
10

Million tonnes of oil equivalent

Oil

Percentage of total regional
consumption

Renewables
Hydroelectricity
Nuclear energy

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

Coal
Natural gas
Oil

Regional energy consumption 2010
(for key, see above)

North S. & Cent. Europe & Africa Asia Paci c
America America Eurasia

BP Statistical Review of World Energy, June 2011

228 Unit 5 Advanced problem solving

a T he first graph shows the proved gas
and oil reserves divided by the actual
consumption for each year; the second
graph shows actual energy consumption
over time; and the third graph shows the
percentage consumption of various fuels
in different regions of the world. Are the
following statements true or false, or
can they not be confirmed? Give a brief
reason for your answer in each case.
A	The world’s oil supplies will run
out in about 40 years, and the gas
supplies in about 60 years.
B	There are about 50% more proved
gas reserves than oil reserves.
C	Over recent years, new discoveries
of oil and gas have just about
matched consumption.
D	Oil and gas reserves are being
discovered at an increasing rate.
E	Energy consumption is increasing,
whilst the known available reserves
are fixed.
b Known oil reserves (expressed as
potential years of consumption) rose
during the 1980s and have been roughly
constant since. During the 1980s,
world consumption of oil rose by a
much smaller amount than the known
reserves. Consider what might have
caused the reserves graph to behave as
it has from 1980 to 2011.
c A comment on this report from the
website of the Green Supply Chain stated:
		The report certainly offers some
causes for alarm, starting with oil
development versus demand.
		  Global oil production increased by
1.8 million barrels per day or 2.2% in
2010, but did not match the rapid 3.1%
growth in consumption, hence leading

to a sharp rise in prices, reaching levels
second only to those seen in 2008.
		  Of greater long-term concern,
proven oil reserves worldwide grew
only 0.5% in 2010, to 1368 billion
barrels . . . So, consumption growth of
3.1% was six times the growth of
reserve identification, spelling
long-term trouble for prices.
Given that reserves are finite and world
energy consumption is rising, what would
be the implications of higher prices and
less use of fossil fuels on world energy
reserves and consumption?
2 In the group stages of a European football
tournament, teams were in groups of four
in which each team played all the others,
making six games in total. The top two
teams in each group after this stage went
through to the quarter-finals. Teams were
awarded three points for a win, one for a
draw and none for losing. After four matches
in Group 1, the situation was as follows.
(Some data is missing from the table.)

b Which teams can still qualify for the
next stages and what results of the final
two matches will be needed to send
each possible pair of teams through?
		(Note: in the event of a draw on points
between two teams, the results of the
match between those two teams will
decide who goes through; if this was
a draw, the difference between goals
scored and goals conceded decides
and, if this is equal, the team with the
most goals scored will go through. If all
else fails, qualification will be decided
by the drawing of lots.)

3 The exercise below is open-ended, in
that no specific questions are asked.
This is quite typical of real-world problemsolving in relation to scientific work. The
experimenter should come to the results
with an open mind and squeeze as much
information from them as possible (without
claiming too much where the results are
not entirely clear).
		 An experiment was carried out to study
the growth of doba-berries using a range
Team
Played Points W D L Goals Goals
of amounts of water and fertiliser. 30
for against
beds were laid out, each with an area of
1 square metre. They were each watered
Greece
2
4
3
2
daily with amounts of water from 5 to
30 litres. At the start of the experiment
Spain
2
4
2
1
amounts of fertiliser from 0 g to 25 g were
applied to each plot. When the crop was
Portugal
2
3
3
2
ripe, the yield from each square metre was
measured. The results are shown in the
Russia
2
0
0
3
following table. The results for a fertiliser
application of 10 g are missing because of
	The remaining two games are Spain vs
a problem with the beds.
Portugal and Greece vs Russia.
		 Analyse this data and draw conclusions
on the effect of water and fertiliser on
a Can you reconstruct the missing data
the crop. Also consider how the two
(games won, drawn and lost for each
factors may interact with each other. A full
team)? How much further can this be
statistical analysis is not required; the
taken: can the results of individual
conclusions may be drawn by averaging
games be established; can the scores
and graphing the data in various ways.
be deduced?

5.4 Data analysis and inference 229

Crop yield: kg/m2

Fertiliser: g/m2

Water input: litres/m2/day
5

10

15

20

25

30

0

3.55

4.58

5.76

5.36

4.04

2.04

5

4.54

5.83

7.16

7.54

6.82

4.73

15

5.21

7.73

9.22

9.32

9.06

8.89

20

4.85

6.89

8.95

10.27

10.40

9.38

25

3.97

6.42

9.04

9.62

10.83

10.32

Answers and comments are on pages 331–33.

230 Unit 5 Advanced problem solving

Unit 6 Problem solving: further techniques

6.1 Using other mathematical
methods

Some types of question may be answered in a
more straightforward manner by using
mathematical techniques of a slightly higher
level than those required so far. In particular,
simple algebra can be used to give a clear
statement of the problem, which can then be
solved by standard mathematical methods.
Other areas where some mathematical
knowledge can help are those such as
probability, permutations and combinations,
and the use of highest common factors and
lowest common multiples. Although these
techniques are beyond the elementary
methods we have used so far, they are dealt
with in the early stages of secondary
education, and most candidates for thinking
skills examinations will have some knowledge
and skill in these areas. Probability is covered
in Chapter 6.3.

Percentages
Most people have a grasp of simple
percentages: if a candidate gets 33% of the
vote in an election it is quite easy to
understand that this means about 1 3 of voters
voted for them. Things become a little more
complicated when we try to multiply or divide
percentages or deal with percentages over 100.
There are, however, very easy ways to tackle
these to make them easier to understand. In
the example above, suppose only 60% of those
eligible to vote actually voted in the election.
What percentage of the total number eligible
did the candidate get? Once again, most
people will be able to handle this, but it is
easier to move away from percentages to do it.
Multiplying 33 by 60 does not help a lot; we

need to understand that 33% is 1 3 and 60% is 3 5,
then multiply the proportions together: 1 3 × 3 5
= 1 5 or 20% is the answer. If a town’s
population is now 120% of what it was 10
years ago, when it was 50,000, the population
is now 1.2 × 50,000, or 60,000. Once again we
had to move from percentages to ratios to do
the calculation.
In many cases where problems involve
percentages the best way to proceed is to use
real numbers rather than percentages. In the
first example above, if 100 people were eligible
to vote, 60 actually voted. Of these 33% or 33
out of 100 voted for the candidate, so 60 × 33 ,
100
or 20 voted for them. This may seem
unnecessary in this simple case, but the value
of this approach becomes clearer in the
example below.

Activity
A blood test is carried out to screen suspects
of a crime. 2% of the population of Bolandia
possess ‘Factor AX’ which is identified by the
test. However, the test is not perfect and 5%
of those not having Factor AX are found
positive by the test (these are called false
positives). Furthermore, in 10% of those with
Factor AX, the test fails to identify them as
having it (false negatives).
A suspect for a crime was tested and
found positive for Factor AX. A lawyer for the
defence asked what the chances were that
somebody testing positive in the test actually
had Factor AX.

6.1 Using other mathematical methods 231

Commentary
Although a fictitious situation, this is similar
to many real problems which medical and
legal professionals have to deal with on a
regular basis, for example in cancer diagnosis.
The answer is much less obvious than it seems
and many people will glance at the results and
give an answer of 95%, which is 100 minus the
percentage of false positives.
Let us now take the approach of putting in
real numbers. In this case we will start with a
very large number (as some of the percentages
are quite small). Say the population of
Bolandia is 10,000. Then 2%, or 200, of these
have Factor AX. Of these 200, 180 are found
positive by the test (i.e. found to have Factor
AX) and 20 are found negative. Of the 9800
without Factor AX, 5%, or 490, are found
positive and 9310 are found negative. The
table below shows the results.
Found
Found
Total
positive negative
With Factor AX

180

20

200

Without Factor AX

490

9310

9800

Total

670

9330

10,000

We can now answer the question: 670 people
are diagnosed positive. Of these, 180 have
Factor AX. 180
is 0.27 or 27%. This is the
670
required answer, the percentage chance that a
person found positive in the test has Factor
AX. Working this out directly from the
percentages would be very difficult.

Algebra
Consider the problem below. This is similar to
one we encountered earlier. It can be solved
using intuition or trial and error, but the
algebraic method illustrated is quicker. Use of
such techniques can be a particular help when
working on thinking skills questions under
time pressure.

232 Unit 6 Problem solving: further techniques

Activity
A ferry travels at 20 km/hour downstream
but only 15 km/hour upstream. Its journey
between two towns takes 5 hours longer
going up than coming down. How far apart
are the two towns?
Before looking at the algebraic solution
below, you may like to consider alternative
ways of solving the question.

Commentary
If the distance between the two towns is x km,
we have:
Time upstream =

x
15

Time downstream =

hours
x
20

hours

Thus, since the difference between these times
is 5 hours:
x
15

−

x
20

=5

Multiplying both sides by 60:
4x − 3x = 300
So x, the distance between the towns, is
300 km. Put this answer back into the question
to check that it is right.
This was a very simple example and hardly
needed the formality of a mathematical
solution. However, similar methods can be
used for more complex questions to reduce
them to equations that can be solved quite
easily. Try the problem below.

Activity
Kara has just left the house of her friend
Betsy after visiting, to walk home. 7 minutes
after Kara leaves, Betsy realises that Kara
has left her phone behind. She chases Kara
on her bicycle. Kara is walking at 1.5 m/s;
Betsy rides her bike at 5 m/s.
How far has Kara walked when Betsy
catches her?

Commentary
Once again, there is more than one way of
answering this question, but algebra can make
it much more straightforward. If Kara has
walked x metres when Betsy catches her, the
time taken in seconds from Kara leaving
Betsy’s house is 1x.5 . The time for Betsy to cycle
this distance is 5x . We know that Kara takes
7 minutes (420 seconds) longer than Betsy, so:
x
1.5

−

x
15

= 420

Multiplying both sides by 15:
10x − 3x = 420 × 15 = 6300, so
x = 900 metres
900 metres takes Kara 600 seconds and takes
Betsy 180 seconds – a difference of 420 seconds
or 7 minutes as required. We could also calculate
that it takes Betsy 3 minutes to catch Kara.

Lowest common factors and
­multiples
Another example follows of a problem that
can be solved using a simple mathematical
technique.

Activity
From a boat at sea, I can see two
lighthouses. The Sandy Head lighthouse
flashes every 6 seconds. The Dogwin
lighthouse flashes every 8 seconds. They
have just flashed together. When will they
flash together again?

Commentary
There is a straightforward way of solving this
with little mathematics; just list when the
flashes happen:
Sandy Head: 6, 12, 18, 24, 30 seconds later
Dogwin: 8, 16, 24 seconds later
So they coincide at 24 seconds. Those with a
little more mathematical knowledge will
spot that this is an example of a lowest
common multiple (LCM) problem. The

answer is the LCM of 6 and 8. The prime
factors of 6 are 2 and 3; the prime factors of 8
are 2, 2 and 2. One of the 2s is common to
both so the LCM is 2 × 2 × 2 × 3 = 24, the
same answer as before.
In this case there is little to choose between
the two methods, but if the counting method
gave no coincidence for 30 or 40 values, the
LCM method would be much faster. There is
another lighthouse example in the end-ofchapter assignments, but with a twist. Problemsolving question-setters often use such twists to
take problems out of the straightforwardly
mathematical so that candidates must use their
ingenuity rather than just knowledge. Even so,
using the mathematics you do know can often
reduce the time necessary for a question.

Permutations and combinations
Another area where a little mathematics can
help is in problems involving permutations
and combinations. Here is another simple
example.

Activity
Three married couples and three single
people meet for a dinner. Everybody shakes
hands with everybody else, except that
nobody shakes hands with the person to
whom they are married.
How many handshakes are there?

Commentary
Without the twist of the married couples, this
would be very straightforward – the answer is
9×8
2 = 36. You have to divide by 2 because the
‘9 × 8’ calculation counts A shaking hands
with B and B shaking hands with A. The
married couples can be taken care of easily,
because they would represent three of the
handshakes, so the total is 33.
The alternative way to do this is to count:
AB, AC, AD . . . AI, BC, BD, etc. This is very
time-consuming.

6.1 Using other mathematical methods 233

Summary
• This chapter has shown how knowledge
of a few relatively simple mathematical
techniques can make the solution of some
problem-solving questions quicker and
more reliable.
• Percentage calculations can be simplified
by replacing the percentages with real
numbers.

• The use of algebra, lowest common
factors and multiples, and permutations
and combinations can aid the finding of
methods of solution and shorten the work
required for some problems.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Rita has a small shop. 40% of the money
she receives from selling cornflakes is
profit. Next week she is having a sale and
is selling cornflakes at three packets for
the price of two. What percentage profit
will she make on cornflakes sold under this
offer?
2 At my local baker’s, the price of bread rolls
is 25¢ and I went with exactly the right
money to buy the number I needed. When
I got there, I found they had an offer giving
5¢ off all rolls if you bought eight or more.
Consequently, I found I could buy three
more for exactly the same money. How
many was I originally going to buy?

3 F rom my boat at sea I can see three
lighthouses, which flash with different
patterns:
• Lighthouse A flashes 1 second on, 2
seconds off, 1 second on, 1 second off,
then repeats.
• Lighthouse B flashes 1 second on, 3
seconds off, 1 second on, 2 seconds
off, 1 second on, 3 seconds off, then
repeats.
• Lighthouse C flashes 2 seconds on, 1
second off, 1 second on, 2 seconds off,
then repeats.
	They have all just started their cycles at
the same time. When do they next all go
on at the same time?
4 Four friends have a photograph taken with
them all throwing their graduation hats in
the air. Afterwards they pick up the hats
and find they all have the wrong hat. How
many different combinations of picking up
the hats are there? In how many of these
combinations do they all have the wrong hat?
Answers and comments are on pages 333–34.

234 Unit 6 Problem solving: further techniques

6.2 Graphical methods of solution
It can often be useful to draw a simple picture
when trying to analyse a problem. This can
take the form of a map, a diagram or a
sketched graph. Some examples where such
pictures can help are given below.

possible to go either way round, but both will
result in the same number of stages. One
minimum route is:
P-Q-T-U-T-V-T-R-S-P
The answer is C, 9 stages.

Activity

Activity

Map
The town of Perros is connected to
Queenston then to Ramwich and finally
Sandsend and back to Perros by a circular
bus service. Ramwich has a bus service to
Upperhouse via Tempsfield. Queenstown has
a bus service to Ventham via Tempsfield.
Orla is visiting the area and wants to look
at all these towns starting and finishing at
Perros. What is the smallest number of
stages (i.e. journeys from one town the next)
she can do the journey in?

Graph
Two buses run services between Southbay and
Norhill. One is an express service which
completes a one-way journey in one hour. The
other is a stopping service which takes 1 hour
45 minutes. The express service starts at
Southbay at 8 a.m. and the stopping service
starts at Norhill at 8 a.m. When each bus
reaches its destination, it waits for 15 minutes
before setting off again. This continues
throughout the day. The last journey of the day
is the last to finish before 8 p.m., each bus
stopping at the town where it started.
How many times do the drivers pass each
other in opposite directions on the road
during the day?

A 7   B 8   C 9   D 10

Commentary
It would be very difficult to answer this
question without some sort of picture. Our
sketch of the towns and bus services only has
to be quite rough and is shown below.
Q

Commentary
N

P

R
S

T

8 a.m.

12 p.m.

8 p.m.

U

V

This now becomes a straightforward problem.
In order to achieve the minimum number of
stages, the shortcut between Q and T must be
taken either on the way out or on the way back
(but not both as we need to visit R). It is

S

8 a.m.

12 p.m.

8 p.m.

The black line shows the express service bus
which starts from Southbay at 8 a.m. This
takes one hour to reach Norhill, where it stops
for 15 minutes; the next line shows the return
journey and so on through the day.

6.2 Graphical methods of solution 235

Similarly, the coloured line shows the
stopping service, starting at Norhill at 8 a.m.
and taking 1 hour 45 minutes to reach
Southbay, where it waits for 15 minutes before
starting the return journey.
The intersections, shown by circles, indicate
where the buses pass in opposite directions:
five times in total. There is also one point
where the fast bus overtakes the slower one
and various positions when they are at either
Southbay or Norhill at the same time.
This question would have taken a very long
time to solve without the diagram as the
crossing points would have had to be inferred
from a timetable.

Commentary

Venn and Carroll diagrams

The left circle represents the Red voters and
the right circle represents Women voters. R
represents Red, B represents Blue, W represents
Women and M represents Men.
We know that the Red vote was 60% of
those who voted, so the areas:

Venn diagrams were introduced in Chapter 3.5.
The problems considered there were relatively
simple and could have been solved without the
diagrams, just by using a bit of clear thinking.
In this chapter we are going to look at
problems that are more complicated and,
although they could be solved without the use
of diagrams, the diagram makes the solution
much more straightforward.
Taking a problem of a similar nature to that
which was used to introduce Venn diagrams,
the extension to one more category makes
analysis of the problem much more complex,
as shown below.

Activity
Elections have just been held in the town of
Bicton. There were two parties, the Reds and
the Blues. Turnout to vote was 70%. The
Reds got 60% of the vote and the Blues the
remaining 40%. An exit poll showed that 30%
of women voting voted Red, whilst 70% voted
Blue. (There are equal numbers of men and
women registered to vote and the percentage
turnout was the same for men and women.)
What proportion of men in the total
electorate voted Blue?

236 Unit 6 Problem solving: further techniques

A Venn diagram for this problem is shown
below. The rectangle represents all those who
voted. We do not need to consider the nonvoters as the exit poll does not categorise
whether non-voters can be defined as Blue, Red,
Men or Women. We just need to remember that
only 70% of the electorate voted.
BM

RM

RW

BW

 M + RW = 0.6 × 0.7 = 0.42, i.e. 42% of the
R
electorate, and
BM + BW = 0.4 × 0.7 = 0.28, i.e. 28% of the
electorate
We know that 50% of the electorate were
women; 70% of these voted; of these, 30%
voted Red and 70% voted Blue, so:
RW = 0.5 × 0.7 × 0.3
= 0.105, i.e. 10.5% of the electorate, and
BW = 0.5 × 0.7 × 0.7
= 0.245, i.e. 24.5% of the electorate
We can now calculate the proportion of the
electorate in each area of the diagram:
RW = 10.5%, BW = 24.5%, RM = 31.5%
and BM = 3.5%
We can check that this is correct as these add
up to 70% – the turnout, and both men and
women add to 35% – equal numbers.
The proportion of women voting Red is
10.5/(10.5 + 24.5) = 30% and the proportion
of Red voters is (10.5 + 31.5)/70 = 60%.

The area BM indicates that 3.5% of the
electorate were men who voted Blue. Since
half the electorate are men, we can now
answer the original question: 7% of men
voted Blue.
This question can also be solved using a
Carroll diagram (originally devised by Lewis
Carroll, author of Alice’s Adventures in
Wonderland), which is really just a table
representing the areas shown in the Venn
diagram. Some people may find Carroll
diagrams easier to understand. Venn and
Carroll diagrams become more complicated
when there are more categories of things
involved, but a problem involving more than
three categories is unlikely to appear in a
thinking skills examination. A Carroll
diagram for two categories is just a 2 × 2 table
(it has four areas, just like the Venn diagram).
You might like to revisit the Venn diagram
activity in Chapter 3.5 using a Carroll
diagram.
The Carroll diagram for three categories
may be drawn with an inner rectangle
expressing one level of the third category (e.g.
non-voters) and, for the problem above, would
appear as shown:
Red

Blue

10.5%

24.5%

Women
Non-voters
30%
Men
31.5%

3.5%

The inner rectangle is not subdivided as it
represents the non-voters. In this case (and, in
fact, in many cases) the Carroll diagram is

easier to understand than the Venn diagram
and the various subdivisions and sums may be
more easily seen and totalled.

Activity
A general household repairs business has 15
workers. Two are managers and do not have
specialised skills. Five are plumbers and do
not do other jobs. There are six electricians
and a number of carpenters. Of these, three
can work as either electricians or carpenters.
How many are carpenters but not
electricians?

Commentary
The Venn diagram for this problem is shown
here.
Managers
2

Plumbers
5

Electricians
Carpenters
3
3
?

As none of the plumbers are either electricians
or carpenters, their area does not intersect
with the other two. The entire outer box
represents the 15 workers. The ‘2’ shown on
the diagram outside the circles represents the
two managers who do not fit any of the other
categories. The 5 plumbers are shown in their
circle. The intersection between electricians
and carpenters represents the 3 which fall into
both categories. As there are 6 electricians,
there must be 3 who are not also carpenters.
We now have 13 accounted for so the
remainder, 2, must be carpenters but not
electricians.

6.2 Graphical methods of solution 237

Summary
• In this unit we have seen how various
diagrams may be used to represent and
solve problems in categorisation, logic and
searching.
• We have looked at using sketched maps
and graphs to clarify and simplify quite
complicated problems.

• More advanced Venn and Carroll diagrams
have been introduced for problems
involving three levels of categorisation.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Winston is organising a dinner to raise
money for his football team. The hall he
has hired is a square room measuring
15 metres by 15 metres. The tables are
rectangular. Each one measures 2 metres
by 80 centimetres and can seat up to eight
people, as indicated in this diagram:

	To fit as many people as possible into
the hall, Winston plans to put the tables
together, end to end, to create parallel
rows. He can use as many tables as he
can fit in, but he has to make sure there
is a gap of at least 1.5 metres between
the edge of any table and the edge of
the room, and also a gap of at least 1.5
metres between rows of tables.
		 What is the maximum number of people
that could sit down to eat at Winston’s
dinner?
A 190 B 192 C 228 D 240 E 288

238 Unit 6 Problem solving: further techniques

2 Draw a Venn diagram for three categories
to sort the numbers from 1 to 39
according to whether they are even,
multiples of three or square numbers.
Write each number in the appropriate part
of the diagram.
3 The island of Nonga has two ferry ports:
Waigura and Nooli. All ferries from Waigura
go to Dulais on a neighbouring island.
Some ferries from Nooli also go to Dulais.
Some of the ferries that serve Dulais
are fast hydrofoil services; those going
elsewhere are slow steamboats.
		 Which of the following statements can
safely be concluded from the information
given above?
A No hydrofoils go to Dulais from Nooli.
B All hydrofoils going to Dulais leave
from Waigura.
C Some hydrofoils from Nooli go to
places other than Dulais.
D Some steamboats from Waigura go
to Dulais.
E All hydrofoils from Waigura go to
Dulais.

4 (Harder task) Anna and Bella both go to
the gym on the same three days each
week. The gym is open from 8 a.m. to
10 p.m. and either may arrive, quite
randomly, any time between 8 a.m. and
3 p.m. Anna stays for one hour and Bella

for 3 4 hour. Over a long period, what is the
percentage of times they will coincide at
the gym?
Answers and comments are on pages 334–35.

6.2 Graphical methods of solution 239

6.3 Probability, tree diagrams and
decision trees

Simple probability
Questions involving probability can occur at
all levels of thinking skills examinations. In
AS Level examinations, these are usually
restricted to simple probability (e.g. the
chances of a 6 coming up in a single throw of
a die) or direct combinations of two
probabilities (e.g. the chances of the numbers
on two dice adding to 7). In the latter case, we
need to distinguish between the combinations
being dependent on each other or
independent. The sum of the numbers on two
dice is an example of an independent
combination – one die is not affected by the
other, and each can randomly show any
number from 1 to 6.
An example of a dependent combination,
where one operation depends on the results of
another, is the drawing of coloured balls from
a bag without replacement.

Activity
A bag contains four red balls and three blue
balls. If two balls are removed from the bag,
what are the chances of drawing one red and
one blue ball?

get the overall chance of this combination:
3
4
2
7 × 6 = 7.
However, we might get a blue ball first with
probability 3 7 . The chances of then drawing a
red ball second are 4 6, so the overall probability
is 4 6 × 3 7 = 2 7 as before. The overall probability
of drawing red/blue in either order is the sum
of these, i.e. 4 7 .
This problem could also have been solved
using a tree diagram (see the next page),
although in this case it would have required
more calculation.
The activity below is a probability problem
with a slight twist which takes it beyond being
a simple mathematical calculation.

Activity
At a village fair there is a game of chance
that involves throwing two dice. The dice are
normal, numbered 1 to 6. One is red and one
is blue. The number on the red die is
multiplied by 10 and added to the number on
the blue die to give a two-digit number. (So, if
red is 2 and blue is 4, your score is 24.) You
win a prize if you score more than 42.
What are the chances of winning?

Commentary
Commentary
We must look at all the possibilities. The
chances of drawing a red ball first are 4 7 . The
chances of then drawing a blue ball are 3 6 (not
3
7 as we have already taken one ball out). We
can then multiply the probabilities together to

240 Unit 6 Problem solving: further techniques

There are 36 (6 × 6) possible throws in all. If
the red die shows 1, 2 or 3, whatever the blue
die shows, you lose (18 of the throws). If the
red die shows 5 or 6, whatever the blue die
shows, you win (12 of the throws). This leaves
6 possible throws with the red die showing 4:

you lose with 2 of these (blue 1 and 2) and you
win with 4 (blue 3, 4, 5 or 6).
So the number of ways of winning is 12 + 4
= 16 out of 36. (The number of ways of losing is
18 + 2 = 20 out of 36.) So the probability of
winning is 16 36 = 4 9.
The examples below are more complex and
are more likely to relate to Advanced Level and
university entrance examinations.

Tree diagrams
Tree diagrams can be of help especially in
probability problems that are not absolutely
straightforward. They enable probabilities for
every combination of events to be evaluated,
and allow probabilities to be divided between all
possible circumstances. They also give the
advantage that, as all probabilities are calculated,
we can check that the sum of them is 1.

Activity

Commentary
A way of solving this problem using a tree
diagram is shown below. At each stage (i.e. as
each coin is drawn from the pocket) the
branches of the tree lead to the possibilities –
in this case only the withdrawal of a 5¢ or 10¢
coin – and the numbers beside the branches
show the probability of each outcome. After
three coins are withdrawn, the totals of all
possible combinations of coin value may be
calculated (by adding coin values along the
branches) and the probability of that
combination obtained (by multiplying the
probabilities along the branches). After
making the calculations, you may check
whether you are correct as the sum of the
probabilities should be 1.
The problem may now be solved. Reading
from the top, combinations 2, 3 and 5 lead to a
sum of 20¢. The sum of the probabilities for
these three combinations is 1 5 + 1 5 + 1 5 = 3 5 , i.e.
a 60% chance.

I have six coins in my pocket: four of 5¢ and
two of 10¢. If I take three coins out of my
pocket at random, what are the chances of
the total being 20¢?

3
5

5¢

5¢
2
5

2
3

1
3

4
5

10¢

5¢

1
2

5¢

15¢

2 × 3 × 1 = 1
3
2
5
5

1
2

10¢

20¢

2 × 3 × 1 = 1
3
2
5
5

3
4

5¢

20¢

2 × 2 × 3 = 1
3
4
5
5

1
4

10¢

25¢

2 × 2 × 1 = 1
5
3
4 15

3
4

5¢

20¢

1 × 4 × 3 = 1
3
5
4
5

1
4

10¢

25¢

1 × 4 × 1 = 1
5
3
4 15

5¢

25¢

1 × 1 × 1 = 1
3
5
1 15

10¢

30¢

1 × 1 × 0 =0
5
3
1

10¢
1
5

10¢

1
0

6.3 Probability, tree diagrams and decision trees 241

Decision trees
The decision tree is an extension of the
probability tree diagram which is used in
commerce and industry to help make strategic
and financial decisions. In this case such
things as costs or times are recorded on the
different branches of the tree and used to
estimate the average cost or time for each
strategy. This will become clearer with an
example; this is a very simple situation chosen
to illustrate the method.
 ary has $5000 to invest and can leave it for
M
two years. She has a choice between a fixed
rate investment at 5% interest per year, or a
variable rate scheme which may rise and fall.
The variable rate scheme pays 6% in the first
year, but may be different in the second year.
She has looked at the financial press, and the
opinion of the experts is that interest rates have
a 20% chance of rising to 8%, a 20% chance of
rising to 6% and a 60% chance of falling to 3%.
Which investment should she choose?
A decision tree diagram for this situation is
shown below.

242 Unit 6 Problem solving: further techniques

This decision tree, like most real ones, has two
types of branch. The first branch shown here
is a choice: whether to take the fixed or
variable rate investment. In the upper branch
we have three different probabilities. These are
things that cannot be controlled. It is
conventional to show choices as squares,
probabilities (or chances) as circles, and end
points as triangles.
In this case, the lower branch results in
interest of $250 (5% of $5000) in the first year,
and $262.50 (5% of $5250) in the second year,
making a grand total of $5512.50.
The method of calculation of the figures in
the upper branch is as follows:
Mary earns $300 in the first year (6%
interest), giving her $5300 at the start of the
second year.
In the second year:
• there is a 60% chance of rates being 3%
and her earning $159 interest
• there is a 20% chance of rates being 6%
and her earning $318 interest
• there is a 20% chance of rates being 8%
and her earning $424 interest.

In order to combine these, we calculate her
expected average interest. This average is
calculated as if she made a large number of
investments over a period of time with the
probabilities shown above: 60% of the time
she would earn $459 interest, and so on. Thus
the expected average amount she has at the
end of two years (remembering to add the
first and second years together) is:
 0% of $5459 + 20% of $5618 + 20% of $5724
6
= $3275.40 + $1123.60 + $1144.80
= $5543.80
This is a better option than the fixed interest
rate at $5512.50, but she would stand a 60%
risk of only having $5459.
In the following activity some of the
probabilities may seem quite arbitrary and
approximate, and the situation is rather
simplified, but real problems can often be
analysed usefully in this way. This is also
much more difficult in that it involves a
comparison of two probability trees with extra
added factors.

Activity
There are two ways I can go to work, both of
which involve a two-part journey. I can cycle to
the bus stop; this takes me 5 minutes
normally, or 15 minutes if a level crossing for
trains is closed on the way, which happens on
10% of occasions. A bus takes on average 5
minutes to come. I catch the first bus, which
may be a slow bus which takes 30 minutes or
a fast bus which takes 15 minutes. I get the
slow bus 20% of the time.
Alternatively, I can drive to the Park and
Ride car park. Driving usually takes me 15
minutes, but about half the time there is a
traffic jam and it takes 20 minutes. When I
get to the Park and Ride, I sometimes get the
bus straight away, but 60% of the time I have
to wait 10 minutes for the next one. The bus
takes 10 minutes to get me to work.
1 What is my shortest time to get to work?
2 On average, what is my best option for
getting to work and how long will it take me?
3 What are the chances of the first journey
option taking 40 minutes or more?

6.3 Probability, tree diagrams and decision trees 243

Commentary
1 Answering the first question does not
require any probability analysis. The first
route, at the quickest, takes 5 minutes
(cycle) + 0 minutes (bus to come) + 15
minutes (fast bus) = 20 minutes.
		 The second route takes 15 minutes
(drive) + 0 minutes (wait for bus) + 10
minutes = 25 minutes.
		 The shortest time is 20 minutes.
2 In order to answer the second question,
we must construct a decision tree as
before. This time, however, on every
branch of the tree, we multiply the
overall probability (converting the
percentage probabilities to proportions,
i.e. 90% becomes 0.9) by the overall time.
We then sum these values to find the
average time (this is also known as the
expected value).
	 This can be explained as follows. For
example, say there is a 30% chance of
a journey taking 20 minutes and a 70%
chance of the journey taking 40 minutes.
If we look at 10 journeys, 3 of them will

take 20 minutes and 7 of them will take
40 minutes. The total time for these 10
journeys is (3 × 20) + (7 × 40) = 60 + 280
= 340 minutes, so the average time is
340
10 = 34 minutes. This is equivalent to
multiplying each journey time by the
probability of that time: (0.3 × 20) +
(0.7 × 40) = 6 + 28 = 34 minutes.
		 The averages are shown on the
decision tree. The cycle/bus option takes
an average of 29 minutes and the drive/
bus option an average of 33.5 minutes,
so the former is better. However, there is
a small chance (2%) of the first option
taking 50 minutes.
3 In order to calculate this, we look at
the branches where the total time
is 40 minutes or more and add the
probabilities. These are 18% (for 40
minutes) and 2% (for 50 minutes), a total
of 20%.
	Decision making is considered further
in Chapter 7.5 (page 283), showing
how decision trees may be used to aid
processes in critical thinking.

Summary
• We have looked at the use of probability
in problem solving. The concepts of
dependent and independent joint
probabilities have been introduced.
• We have considered how more complex
probabilities can be analysed using tree
diagrams.

244 Unit 6 Problem solving: further techniques

• The extension of tree diagrams to decision
trees has been described and it has been
shown how these might be used to help
with decision making in commerce and
industry.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 My drawer contains eight blue socks and
six black socks. If I take four socks out at
random, what are the chances that they
will make up two matching pairs?
2 My wife has sent me to the bank with her
cash card. I do not know the four-digit
number I have to enter into the machine to
withdraw money. I know the first two digits
are the two digits of her month of birth, in
the right order. The last two digits are the
date in the month of her birthday. There
are no zeros and I have forgotten my wife’s
birthday.
		 What are the chances of my getting it
right first time? What are the chances of
my getting it right in the three attempts I
am allowed?
3 A fairground game involves taking three
throws to get a ring over two poles in the
ground at different distances from the
throwing position. Throws must be taken
alternately at the two poles, but you may
start with either one. You win a prize if your
ring lands over a pole in two successive
throws out of the three.

	Clearly, it is easier to throw the ring over
the nearer pole than the farther one. Is it
better to make your attempts in the order
‘near, far, near’ or ‘far, near, far’, or doesn’t
it matter?

4 Metco make components for small
electrical equipment. One production line
makes 500,000 switches each year. They
currently use a manual inspection system
with one quality control operative. 1% of
the production is faulty and the operative
finds and rejects 90% of these. Metco sell
the switches for $2 each but any faulty
ones which are delivered cost the company
$25 in replacement and compensation
costs. The quality control operative costs
$40,000 per year to employ.
		 Metco’s management are considering
installing an automatic quality control
system. This will mean the quality control
operative will be made redundant, for
which they will have to make a single
payment of $10,000. The manufacturers
of the new system claim that it will
pick up 99% of faulty switches, but the
production manager is sceptical about
this. He estimates that there is only a
20% chance of it being this good and an
80% chance that it will only pick up 95%
of the faulty switches. The new equipment
will cost $180,000 which will be written
off over four years (1 4 each year). Other
manufacturing costs will not be affected by
the quality control system used.
		 By calculating the average income
and costs per year for a four-year period,
investigate the economics of the old and
new systems, considering which is most
likely to be the best to use.
Answers and comments are on pages 336–39.

6.3 Probability, tree diagrams and decision trees 245

6.4 Have you solved it?
This chapter considers how you may check
and be sure that your answer to a problemsolving question is correct. In real life, there
might be several possible answers, or even no
answer to a problem. (Can you fit a square peg
into a round hole?) However, in examinations,
especially those with multiple-choice answers,
there must be a correct answer. One of the
options in some cases might, of course, be that
the task cannot be done. This means that,
when you have an answer, you must have a
way of being sure that it is correct.
Different problems need to be checked in
different ways. Sometimes it is possible to put
the answer back into the question and see if it
‘fits’. This is probably the easiest way. For
example, look at the question in Chapter 3.5
(page 94) about Amy and David passing on the
road. We concluded that they would pass at
10.40 a.m. We can now go back and see where
they both were at 10.40 a.m. Amy left at 8 a.m.
so by 10.40, at 120 km/hr, she had travelled
320 km. Similarly, David, leaving at 10 a.m.,
had travelled 80 km. The total is 400 km,
which is the distance between their two
houses, so the answer is correct.
Similarly, the first problem in Chapter 3.3
(page 86), with the table showing
participation in exercise, could be checked by
putting the correct figure into the table and
seeing whether all the rows and columns
added up correctly.
You can go back and check the answers for a
lot of the activities and examples in Unit 3 of
the book by using the ‘put it back in’ method.
However, the second problem in Chapter
3.3, involving a graph showing temperatures,
cannot be checked in this way. We are simply
being asked to extract the right value from the

246 Unit 6 Problem solving: further techniques

graph and there is no way of putting this back
in to see whether it is right. In cases like this,
the answer simply has to be checked carefully.
What exactly was the question asking? Is this
what we answered? Is the numerical value of
the answer about what we would expect?
The same applies to questions requiring a
search. ‘Putting the answer back’ will tell you
whether your answer fits the criteria asked for
in the question but will not tell you whether it
is the lowest (or largest) possible answer. If the
search is not too large, you can sometimes
check, if you are looking for the lowest answer,
that all smaller answers will not work. This can
be time-consuming and impractical if the
search is large. It is often better to check your
method and be sure that it will come up with
the correct answer.
Approximation, or a feel for the magnitude
of results, is a skill that can be refined through
practising this type of question. This is
particularly valuable when questions depend
on getting the decimal point in the right
place. A minimum temperature of 10°C might
be acceptable when 100°C would not.
The end-of-chapter assignment considers
several problems that may have a variety of
ways of checking. It is always preferable to use
a different method for checking the problem
from that which you originally used to solve it.
If you simply repeat your original calculation,
it is possible that any mistake you made in the
first instance you will make again.
Checking the answers of questions
involving searches (see Chapter 3.6) can be
more difficult. There can often be more than
one way of searching but, if you have done the
question efficiently, any other way may be
time-consuming. It is often more important to

ensure that your method of searching is
‘cast-iron’ and will not produce an incorrect
answer unless you make a slip.

Multiple-choice questions
In questions which require numerical answers,
it is usually best to work through the question
to the answer and then check that it is among
the list of options. Guessing can be dangerous.
However, there are aspects of answering some
particular types of multiple-choice questions
that can help in getting the correct answer.
One is elimination. This is especially useful in
answering certain types of questions where the
answers form part of the question, for example
those involving spatial reasoning and
identifying similarity between two sets of data.
Even if you are guessing an answer, you can
increase your chances of getting it right by
eliminating one or two of the options.
It is not always necessary to check every
aspect of a drawing, graph or table to be sure
that it is wrong. Sometimes one needs only to
check a single part – for example one plotted
point on a graph – to eliminate it as a possible
answer. This means that the time available for
the question can be concentrated on the more
likely answers and in checking that your final
answer is correct. You can try this in the
activity below.

Activity
The piece of card shown below, when folded
up, makes a cubical die for a children’s game.
The sides have various symbols on them.

When the die is folded into shape, which side
will be opposite the triangle?
A
B
C
D
E

The arrow
The circle
The square
The smiley face
The star

Commentary
We can see that both the circle and the square
have an edge in common with the triangle, so
neither can be opposite it when the cube is
made up. Therefore both of these can be
eliminated. Similarly, the smiley face has a
corner in common with the triangle, so this
can also be eliminated. We now only have to
look at the arrow and star. There are various
ways to choose, but here it is best to imagine
the cube folded, whereupon we see that the
star must also have a common edge with the
triangle, leaving the arrow as the correct
answer.

Summary
• We have seen how an answer may be
checked by ‘putting it back’ into the
question.
• This method may not work for all
questions, and other ways of checking may
be needed for other types of question.
• Elimination of incorrect answers can help
in finding the correct solution to multiplechoice questions.

6.4 Have you solved it? 247

End-of-chapter assignment
Reconsider some or all of the following
problems from the end-of-chapter
assignments and see whether you can find
ways of checking that your answer is correct.
Try to use a different method from the one
originally used for solving the question. Look
at how you might eliminate some of the
options in multiple-choice questions, where
appropriate.

248 Unit 6 Problem solving: further techniques

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Chapter
Chapter
Chapter
Chapter
Chapter
Chapter
Chapter
Chapter
Chapter
Chapter

3.2, question 2 (page 85)
3.3, question 4 (page 89)
3.4, question 2 (page 92)
3.5, question 1 (page 97)
3.7, question 3 (page 105)
3.8, question 3 (page 110)
3.10, question 2 (page 118)
3.12, question 2 (page 124)
5.1, question 2 (page 209)
6.1, question 2 (page 234)

Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

7.1 Conditions and conditionals
Conditions are familiar in everyday life. Think
about the expression ‘conditions of sale’
which apply when you buy something. You
buy a DVD, for example, on condition that
you don’t make copies of it and sell them on
to other people. The booking conditions on an
airline ticket may allow a refund if you cancel
up to a month before the flight, but not if you
leave it any later. Another familiar example
can be found in the entry requirements –
another word for conditions – that colleges or
universities set for admission. But although
the concept is so familiar, and the word
commonplace in our language, conditions can
cause problems if they are not fully
understood or made clear.
Let’s say you have been offered a place in a
college of choice if you score 70 in the
entrance exam. In other words scoring 70 is a
condition of entry to the college. This might
sound quite plain and straightforward. But it
can be thoroughly ambiguous. For there are
three ways of interpreting a condition of
entry; and how you interpret it can make a lot
of difference to the consequences.

Necessary and sufficient conditions
Conditions fall into two categories according
to whether they are necessary or sufficient.
Scoring 70, for example, could be a necessary
condition, in which case you will not get into
the college if you score 69 or less. But if it is a
necessary condition only, then a score of 70
may not, on its own, be enough to secure you
a place. The exam may be followed by an
interview to choose the best students from all
those who scored 70 or more. This practice is
very common in circumstances where there is
a lot of competition for a limited number of

places. Under such a condition, therefore, a
score of 70 would be necessary, but not
sufficient – which could be quite a shock if you
scored 80 and still got turned down!
Alternatively, scoring 70 may be a sufficient
condition. If it is truly sufficient, and you do
score 70, you are accepted, and that is the end of
it. There are no other hurdles to clear. But when
you say something is a sufficient condition, that
doesn’t mean it is also a necessary one. For
example, there may be a second chance for
anyone who scored, say, 60 or more to be
interviewed, and to gain a place that way, so
that as well as those who automatically qualify
by exam there are others who may qualify by
interview. This, too, is a common practice, in
circumstances where there are more places than
there are strong applicants who are likely to
meet the qualifying condition.
There is, of course, a third way of applying
the condition, and that is to make it necessary
and sufficient at the same time. This would
mean that you get in if you score 70 or more
and don’t get in if you score 69 or less. This is
not such a common practice in a context like
entry requirements, for the very good reason
that it would allow no flexibility. If the entry
conditions were both necessary and sufficient,
a department could end up with fewer
students than it would like to have, or with
more than it can cater for.

Flow diagrams
One useful way to present this kind of data is in
a flow diagram, or flow chart. From the
following diagram you can read off the
information that a score of 70 is a sufficient
condition for an offer, because a Yes response
leads straight to an offer. But it is not a

7.1 Conditions and conditionals 249

necessary condition, because a No response can
also lead to an offer. This is a fairly simple
scenario, with only two paths leading to a
positive outcome. In more complex situations,
with several branching paths, a diagram can be
a very useful aid for ‘reading off’ the conditions.

tell us whether or not it is. To express
necessary conditions you may need to employ
other words such as ‘not’, ‘only’ or ‘unless’.

Activity
Here are six more conditional statements. For
each one say whether scoring 70 or more is a
necessary or a sufficient condition, or both:

According to the diagram, a score of at least 60
is a necessary condition, because the No branch
leads straight to a refusal. But it is not a
sufficient condition because there is still
another condition to be met after satisfying the
60+ condition: another branching of the tree.

Conditional statements
Conditional statements, that is statements that
stipulate conditions, typically contain the word
‘if’, or ‘if’ followed shortly by ‘then’. For example:
[1] If Mia scored 70 or more, then she has a
place.
Note that [1] is not an argument; it is just a
statement. It would be an argument if it were
expressed as follows:
[2] Mia scored more than 70 and therefore
she has a place.
The difference is that in [2] it is asserted that
Mia did score more than the required mark,
whereas in [1] it remains a possibility. In both
cases, however, getting 70 or more is presented
as a sufficient condition. It may also be a
necessary condition, but the sentence doesn’t

250 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

A You will be offered a place only if you
score 70 or more.
B If you don’t get 70 or more you won’t be
offered a place.
C You will be offered a place if and only if
you score 70 or more.
D If you get 70, you are in.
E Unless you score 70, you won’t get a
place.
F If you score 70 you’re in, but if you don’t
you can always re-sit the exam.

Commentary
In A and B the pass mark is a necessary
condition. Look at them carefully and you will
see they say the same thing. However, neither
of them says whether there is any other
requirement, such as an interview or a medical
or even some residential condition, such as
living in the country or town where the
college is. All A and B assert is that 70 is the
minimum requirement, which is yet another
way of saying that it is necessary for admission.
C sets a necessary and sufficient condition. It
is an abbreviation (or ‘contraction’) of two
statements: ‘You will get in if you score 70 or
more’ and ‘You won’t if you don’t.’ In logic such
statements are called biconditionals, ‘bi-’
meaning ‘two’. There are two conditions in one.
In D the condition is sufficient: it doesn’t
say whether it is necessary as well. Compare it
with [1], and note that it is really just another
way of expressing the same condition.
E obviously states a necessary condition but,
unlike A and B, it emphasises that scoring 70 is
not also a sufficient condition. F appears to do

the opposite: it states a score of 70 in the exam is
a sufficient condition but adds that if you get less
you can re-sit. However, you may still have to get
70 or more at some time, so it is unclear whether
the mark of 70 is necessary as well as sufficient.
Possibly on the re-sit the required mark will be
lower, so as to fill any remaining places.

The structure of conditionals
A conditional is a complex statement that is
true or false as a whole, independently of
whether the parts of it are true or not. You
were introduced briefly to complex claims,
including conditionals, in Chapter 2.2. The
example there was the claim that:
[3] Many parts of the world will soon be
submerged if nothing is done to reverse
climate change.
This statement consists of two shorter
sentences (or clauses), connected by ‘if’. Note
that the order of the sentences can be reversed,
bringing the if-clause to the front. This is the
standard way to express a conditional in logic.
[3a] 
If nothing is done about climate change
then many parts of the world will soon
be submerged.
The if-clause is called the ‘antecedent’ because
logically it comes before the then-clause. The
then-clause is called the ‘consequent’, because
it follows logically from the antecedent. If the
antecedent is true, then the consequent is true
too. This logical relation holds whether the
conditional is expressed like [3] or [3a]; and
whether or not the word ‘then’ is included.
Conditional claims are extremely valuable
tools for our thinking and reasoning. Without
them we would not be able to reason
hypothetically – that is, without knowing
whether or not the antecedent was true.
Another term for this is suppositional reasoning.
In [3] what the speaker is effectively saying is:
[3b] ‘Suppose we do nothing about climate
change, this is what will happen.’

or
[3c] Suppose we did nothing about climate
change, this is what would happen.
None of the claims above means that nothing
will be done about climate change. Nor does
it mean that parts of the world will be
submerged in the near future. The only claim
that is being made is that this will happen if
we do (or did) nothing; it is the consequence of
doing nothing.

Hypothetical claims
Conditional statements and remarks are
sometimes referred to as ‘hypotheticals’.
‘Hypothetical’, in this context, means
‘conditionally true’. Politicians are often asked
hypothetical questions, particularly by
journalists and media presenters, to try to get
them to commit themselves to some
prediction, or future course of action.
For example:
‘Minister, what will you do if these allegations
of bribery turn out to be true? Will you
resign?’
To which the politician is likely to reply:
‘I am not going to answer that question,
because it is purely hypothetical. The
allegations aren’t true.’
If she is persistent enough, the journalist may
get the minister to concede:
[4] ‘All right, I would resign if I had taken the
bribe. But I haven’t.’
This is not a statement that the minister will
resign, only that he would under certain
conditions. It is thus a hypothetical
statement. Statement [3c] is also hypothetical
in the sense that the speaker is not suggesting
or predicting that nothing will be done.
Indeed the speaker is assuming that
something will be done in view of the
consequences if it is not done.

7.1 Conditions and conditionals 251

Logical form
Logicians show the structure or form of
complex statements by substituting letters
(p, q, r, etc.) for the actual clauses.
A conditional statement has the form:
If p then q.
Statement [1], at the beginning of the chapter,
has this form. In [1] p stands for: ‘Mia scored 70
or more’, and q stands for: ‘She (Mia) has a
place’. If we wanted to say that Mia did not get
70 or more, or that she does not have a place,
we could write ‘not-p’ or ‘not-q’ respectively. In
Chapter 7.2 we shall explore ways in which
these formal expressions can be helpful in
understanding and evaluating some
arguments.

Conditions and reasoning errors
We have looked in some detail at conditions
and conditional (hypothetical) statements
because some of the most serious weaknesses
and flaws in arguments come from confusing
them.

Activity
Critically evaluate the following two
arguments. What role do necessary and/or
sufficient conditions play in the reasoning?
Are these good or bad arguments?
[5] If, as alleged, the government minister
has a business interest that he has not
declared, he would have certainly been
forced to resign. Last night he did
resign, so there must be truth in the
allegation.
[6] A government minister would not resign
over an allegation of undeclared
interests unless there was some truth in
it. The fact that he has resigned means
that there is some truth.

252 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

Commentary
We’ll consider the two arguments in turn,
starting with [5]. There are various ways in
which you could find fault with this argument.
You could say, for example, that it assumes,
without justification, that the minister’s reason
for resigning was the undeclared business
interest, whereas he might have resigned for
some other reason altogether. Another way to
explain this is that although the discovery of
undeclared interests would be sufficient to force
the minister’s resignation, it is not a necessary
condition, since (as already observed)
something else might have forced it. The
underlying argument in [5] is as follows:
If the minister has undeclared interests,
he would have had to resign.
He has resigned.
 e must have an undeclared interest.
H
(The allegation must be true.)
The argument in [5] is clearly unsound. [6]
does not make the same error. The first
premise states a necessary condition: it is
equivalent to saying that a minister would
resign only if the allegation were true; or that if
a government minister resigns over such an
allegation, then it must bear some truth.
Therefore, since the minister has resigned, the
inference can only be that there is some truth
in the allegation. The reasoning in [6] is solid.

Summary
• Conditions can be divided into two kinds:
necessary and sufficient.
• Conditional, or hypothetical, statements
typically have the form ‘If p then q’.
• Confusing necessary with sufficient
conditions often results in reasoning
errors.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 A tutor made the following prediction to a
group of students: ‘If you have not read the
coursebook, you won’t pass the exam.’
a Explain this prediction in terms of
necessary and sufficient conditions.
b Which one of the following has to be true
if the tutor’s prediction was correct – and
why do the others not have to be true?
A All those who read the book passed
the exam.
B All those who had not read the book
failed the exam.
C The same number of students read
the book as passed the exam.
D Only those who passed the exam had
read the book.
E None of those who failed the exam
had read the book.
OCR
2 A car insurance company has special
terms for young drivers. If the driver is 25
or over and has a clean licence (i.e. no
driving convictions), then the application
is approved. If the driver has a clean
licence and is under 25 but is 21 or over,
the application is approved only if he or
she has an Advanced Driving Qualification
(ADQ). Applications from drivers under
25 with no ADQ are refused. Drivers are
also refused if they are under 21 (with or
without an ADQ). So are any drivers who do
not have a clean licence.
a Draw a flow diagram which represents
the information in the above text. (It is
advisable to start with: ‘Clean licence –
Yes or No?’
b Use your diagram, and/or the text, to say
whether each of the following statements
is correct or incorrect – and why:
A Being 21 or over is a necessary
condition for approval.

B Possession of an ADQ and a clean
licence are sufficient for approval.
C Being 25 or over is neither a
necessary nor a sufficient condition
for approval.
D For Jason, who is 23, passing an ADQ
is a necessary but insufficient
condition for approval.
E Being under 21 is a sufficient
condition for refusal.
3 (Harder task)
It is just as well, from an evolutionary
standpoint, that water freezes with its
molecules bonding to form a very
open lattice. This unusual structure is
such that the density of water ice is
less than that of liquid water, which is
why ice floats unlike other solids with
tighter structures such as iron. (An iron
bar placed in molten iron will sink.)
Where and when the oceans freeze, ice
forms a layer of insulation on the
surface which holds in the heat of the
liquid below. Without this protection
the seas would freeze solid, from the
bottom up; and life as we know it,
which began in water, would not exist.
 xplain and assess the reasoning in the
E
above argument. In your analysis state
whether the unusual structure of water is
presented as:
• a sufficient condition for life as we know it
• a necessary but insufficient condition
for life as we know it
• both a necessary and sufficient
condition for life as we know it
• neither a necessary nor sufficient
condition for life as we know it.
Answers and comments are on page 339.

7.1 Conditions and conditionals 253

7.2 Soundness and validity:
a taste of logic

A good argument is one that can be trusted. If
the reasons from which it starts are true, we need
to know that the conclusion will be true too, and
true for the reasons given. An argument which
gives that assurance, and whose reasons are
warranted, can be rated as sound. An argument
which fails on either of those counts is unsound.
Critical evaluation of an argument basically
means judging its soundness.

Validity
Obviously, if we don’t accept the reasons
(premises) that are given for a conclusion then
we cannot trust the conclusion either. But
even if we do accept all the reasons as true, we
may still find, on inspection, that what is
inferred from those reasons simply does not
follow. Thirdly, there are many instances in
which we simply don’t know whether the
reasons are true or not, but we still want to
know that the reasoning is good, so that if the
premises are true we can be sure that the
conclusion would be true as well. An argument
that gives that assurance is said to be valid.
And it remains valid – though not sound –
even if the premises are known to be false.
What we need, therefore, is a way of judging
the quality of reasoning in an argument that is
independent of the truth of the premises; or at
least which sets aside the truth-or-falsity issue
whilst judging the quality of the reasoning in
isolation. The discipline which provides the
methodology for this judgement is logic.

Logic
We saw in Chapter 2.10 that the word ‘sound’
has both a special meaning in logic and
critical thinking, and a general meaning. So it

254 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

can apply to boats, buildings and so on, as
well as to arguments. Likewise, ‘valid’ and
‘invalid’ can be used to describe a whole range
of objects, material and abstract. A rail ticket
is valid for certain journeys but not for others,
and is invalid if it is out of date. An argument,
or form of reasoning, is invalid if its premise
could be true and its conclusion false.
Likewise it is valid if, whenever the premises
are true, the conclusion cannot be false.
It is crucial to note that when logicians talk
about validity they are talking about forms of
argument, not just about individual
arguments. An argument is valid or invalid by
virtue of its form. Individual arguments are
different from each other because they are
made up from different sentences with
different meanings; but countless different
arguments can share the same form. In fact, if
you think back to Chapter 2.5, you will
remember that all arguments have the same
basic or ‘standard’ form:
[1]

R1, R2, . . . Rn / C

or
R1
R2
. . . Rn
C
where ‘R’ stands for a reason or premise, and
‘C’ for a conclusion. The separator ‘/’, or the
horizontal line, stands for the logical relation
of ‘following from’, and is roughly equivalent
to the word ‘so’ or ‘therefore’.
Since [1] is the form of any argument
whatsoever, it is obviously not a valid form,

because some standard arguments are valid and
some are not. Any number of invalid arguments
could be made by substituting true sentences for
R1, R2, etc. and a false one for C. Substituting
different sentences for the letters R . . . and C
makes it possible to test arguments for validity.
If you can find any examples in which the Rs
are all true and C false, you know the argument
is invalid, even though there may be other
examples where the conclusion is true. For an
argument to be valid every argument with the
same form must be valid too.

Activity
Here is a short example to illustrate what is
involved in testing the validity of an
argument.
[2] Many insects have wings and those
that do can fly. Birds also have wings,
and parrots are birds, so they can fly too.
Decide for yourself whether [2] is valid, giving
reasons for your evaluation. Take some time
over this. It is not as simple as it looks.

Commentary
We’ll begin by analysing the argument. It
makes three claims, followed by the
conclusion:
R1 Many insects have wings and those that
do can fly.
R2 Birds have wings.
R3 Parrots are birds.
C

Parrots can fly (too).

How should we evaluate this argument? We
can see that the premises are all true. We can
also see that the conclusion is true: parrots can
fly. These facts may have fooled you into
thinking that the argument was valid, and
therefore sound as well. It isn’t. Although the
conclusion is true it is not made true by the

reasons. The fact (R2) that birds have wings
doesn’t mean all of them can fly, and therefore
the fact (R3) that parrots are birds doesn’t
establish that they can fly either. R1 really
gives no support to the conclusion, because
what is true for insects has no bearing on what
is true for birds. It is irrelevant.
We can see how invalid [2] is if we substitute
‘penguins’ for ‘parrots’, because penguins are
birds that cannot fly:
[3] Many insects have wings and those that
do can fly. Birds also have wings, and
penguins are birds, so penguins can fly
too.
In [3] the premises are just as true as they were
in [2], but in [3] the conclusion is false.
Therefore [3] is invalid. However, [2] and [3]
have precisely the same form, so both are
invalid (and therefore unsound too).

A valid form
Here is a different argument.
[4] All birds can fly. Penguins are birds, so
penguins can fly.

Activity
What do you make of this argument? Is it
valid? Is it sound?

Commentary
Again you may be surprised. This argument is
valid. It is valid because if all birds really could
fly then penguins would be able to fly (because
they are birds). It is unsound because it is not
true that all birds can fly. But that is not a fault
with the reasoning, only with the first
premise. The point to remember is that
validity is to do with the form of the
argument, not the subject matter. The validity
of [4] has nothing to do with birds and things
that can fly, but applies to any class of objects
whatsoever. We can see why [4] is valid if we

7.2 Soundness and validity: a taste of logic  255

represent it in a Euler diagram; diagrams and
symbols can often show the form of an
argument better than words:

resolve that dispute, [5] remains valid, as the
Euler diagram confirms:
have gills

F

sh

B
P

sharks

In this diagram we replace things that can fly
with the letter F, birds with B and penguins
with P. Then we forget about what these mean.
What the diagram shows is that whatever Ps
are, they are all Bs, because the P circle is
completely enclosed by the B circle. Likewise
the B circle, and the P circle with it, are
completely inside the F circle. Therefore, since
all Ps are Bs and all Bs are Fs, it follows that all
Ps are Fs – whatever P, B and F stand for. And
that is why [4] is valid.

Soundness
You should now be able to see that this form of
argument will never give a false conclusion if
its two premises are true. So if we take a valid
structure, like [4], and substitute true premises,
we have a sound argument and a reliable
conclusion. For instance:
[5]

R1
R2

All fish have gills.
Sharks are fish.

C

Sharks have gills.

This argument rests on the truth of R1 and R2.
Someone might object that R1 was false
because whales and dolphins, which are
mammals, are ‘fish’ in the everyday sense of
the word – i.e. creatures that live and swim in
the sea – but don’t have gills. That would be a
challenge to the soundness of the argument,
but not to its validity. You could respond by
stating that all true fish (which excludes the
aquatic mammals, jellyfish and so on) have
gills; and sharks are true fish. But however you

256 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

Deductive reasoning
Examples [4] and [5] are valid arguments and
[5], arguably, is sound as well. To be more
precise we ought to say that these are
deductively valid arguments. That is because
the above definition of validity really applies
to certain types of reasoning called deduction,
or deductive reasoning. Deductive arguments,
so long as they are valid, are very strict,
rigorous arguments in which the conclusion
follows inescapably from the premises. But by
the same token, an attempted deduction that
is invalid fails completely, so that regardless of
the truth of its premises, it is unsound. You
cannot have a deductive argument that is ‘a
bit valid’ or ‘very nearly valid’: it’s all or
nothing.
Here is a centuries-old example that
logicians have used to illustrate deductive
validity:
[6] All men are mortal. Socrates is a man.
Therefore Socrates is mortal.
You may have noticed that this is very similar
in form to example [4] above, and it is valid for
the same reasons. It is often contrasted with
the next argument, which makes all the same
claims but is certainly not valid:
[7] All men are mortal. Socrates is mortal.
Therefore Socrates is a man.

Activity
Discuss why [7] is not valid. What is wrong
with it, and how is it different from [6]?

Commentary

that express them. As we have seen, symbols,
diagrams and formulas can be used to show
the form of an argument. The symbols may
stand for individuals, like Socrates; or classes
of things, like birds. Or they can stand for
whole sentences, like ‘Parrots can fly,’ or
‘Whales are not fish.’
Another way to reach the conclusion of
[5], for example, is as follows:

In [6] we are told Socrates is a man and that all
men are mortals. That tells us that Socrates is
also mortal. In [7] we are again told that all
men are mortal, and that Socrates is mortal
too. But that would not tell us that Socrates is a
man, if we did not already know it. There are
many other classes of mortals besides men:
women, children, parrots and penguins, to
name just a few. Therefore the premises in [7]
do not themselves establish that the Socrates
referred to in the argument is a man. (If we
didn’t know differently ‘Socrates’ could be the
name of a parrot.)
Here is a Euler diagram showing the
invalidity of [7]:

As we saw in the last chapter, the form of
conditional sentences can be given by
replacing each of the simple sentences with a
letter. If the letter f stands for ‘sharks are fish’,
and g for ‘sharks have gills’, [8] can be written:

men

This form of argument is always valid,
whatever sentences you substitute for f
and g (or whatever symbols you use). In fact,
[8] is so obviously valid that it hardly
needs saying.
Here is another simple but valid argument.
It has the same first premise as before, but this
time the second premise is a denial of g –
written ‘Not-g’ – and the conclusion is ‘Not-f’.

mortals

parrots
Socrates

[8] If sharks are fish, they have gills. Sharks
are fish, so they do have gills.

If f then g
f
g

[9]

The diagram shows that men, Socrates and
parrots are all mortal, but does not establish
that all individuals called ‘Socrates’ are men
(or parrots). As it happens Socrates was a man,
so the conclusion is true; but it does not follow
from the reasons.

Formal logic
Because logicians are primarily concerned
with different forms of argument, they are less
concerned with the meanings of the sentences

If f then g
Not-g
Not-f

The validity of [9] is not quite as obvious as [8],
but it is a valid form of argument. For example:
[9a] If (f) whales are fish, then (g) whales
have gills. Whales do not have gills
(Not-g), so whales are not fish (Not-f).
Or in more natural language:
[9b] If whales were fish they’d have gills; but
they don’t, so they’re not.

7.2 Soundness and validity: a taste of logic  257

What both of these imply is that anything that
is a fish would have gills. So if a whale – or
anything else – doesn’t have gills, it is not a
fish. This is even implied by:
[9c]

Whales aren’t fish; they’ve got no gills.

Strictly speaking, of course, [9c] is not logically
valid because it has a premise missing.
However, in the less formal discipline of
critical thinking we can interpret [9c] as a
sound argument because the missing premise
is so very clearly implied. By arguing from a
whale’s lack of gills to the conclusion that
whales are not fish, there is a clear, though
unstated, assumption that if whales were fish,
they would have gills – or just that all fish have
gills (see Chapter 2.9).

Activity
Two short arguments follow. At first glance
they resemble [8] and [9] respectively. But on
close inspection you will see that there are
differences. The question is, are either or
both of them valid?
[10] If you were bitten by a poisonous
spider, you would already have a
red, swollen wound. This wound is
red and swollen, so obviously you
were bitten by a poisonous spider.
[11] If that were a spider bite, you’d need
to see a doctor. But it isn’t a spider
bite, so you don’t need a doctor.

Commentary
This time we’ll use the letters p and q, the
traditional logical symbols for any claim (or
‘proposition’) whatsoever. We can then see
that the first premise in [10] and [11] has the
same form as [8] and [9], namely: ‘If p then q’.
But there the similarity ends. For in each case
the second premise and the conclusion are
reversed. [10] has the form:

258 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

If p then q
q
p
and [11]:
If p then q
Not-p
Not-q
These might seem minor differences, but they
are enough to make both the arguments
invalid. Even if the premises are true – and
we’ll assume they are – the conclusions don’t
necessarily follow. In [10] you are told that if
you were bitten by a spider you would have a
red, swollen wound, i.e. q. But we cannot
assume that any red, swollen wound must be
a spider bite. Other wounds can be red and
swollen. So the premises of the argument can
be true, and the conclusion could be false;
which, by definition, makes the reasoning
invalid.
Similarly in [11], there may be other
reasons, besides a spider’s bite, why you need
to see a doctor. So the fact that if it were a
spider bite you would need a doctor, doesn’t
mean that if it is not a spider bite, you don’t.
Again, the conclusion can be false, even if
both premises are true.

Critical thinking and logic
The examples we have been examining in this
chapter are of the sort that logic books use to
define and explain validity. They are not
meant to be ‘real’ arguments, in the sense of
resembling everyday reasoning. They are
contrived and artificial, and deliberately so,
because that is the best way to display their
form. No one in an ordinary, practical situation
would go to the bother of arguing that suchand-such a person was mortal because he or
she was human, and all humans are mortal.
What [6] and [7] are for (on page 256) is to

show the difference between a valid and an
invalid form of argument, so as to make them
easier to recognise when we are interpreting
more authentic, natural arguments.
Critical thinking is directed towards real, live
arguments that you come across in newspapers,
magazines, blogs, scientific theories, political
debates and so on. The purpose of analysing
live arguments is to try to reveal their
underlying logical form as plainly as possible,
without the frills of natural language, so as to
judge whether or not the reasoning is sound –
and if not, why not. Sometimes formal logic can
assist in this (though not always).
The next argument is still a made-up example,
but it is expressed in a more natural style of
language, and a more realistic context. Suppose
someone – we’ll call her Andrea – has inherited a
ring with a large stone in it which she has reason
to think is a diamond. What is more, she is right in
her belief; but not being an expert, she has no way
of knowing for sure. A friend – some friend! –
offers to have it valued for her. He returns with
the surprising and disappointing news that the
ring is practically worthless, and that therefore the
stone is not a diamond:
[12] ‘Let’s face it: if a stone that big was a
real diamond, this ring of yours would
be worth thousands of dollars. Sadly,
it’s not worth $20. It’s pretty, but that
doesn’t make it valuable. So I’m afraid
the stone is not a diamond, and I’m
sorry to be the one who has to tell you.’
He volunteers to buy it from her for his
daughter for $50, which now seems like a
generous offer. Having accepted his argument,
and its conclusion, she accepts the offer too,
and sells him the ring.

Activity
Discuss whether the argument is valid and/
or sound.

Commentary
The answer is that the argument is not sound,
but it is valid. Make no mistake about this.
What makes it valid is that if its premises had
both been true, there would have been no
escaping the truth of the conclusion. For no
large, genuine diamond would have so low a
value, and this ring, according to the friend,
has practically none. If the second claim were
as true as the first, then the stone could not
have been a diamond.
Of course we know, from the story, that
the conclusion is false. But that doesn’t make
the argument invalid. Its form, when we cut
it down to the bare bones, is the same as
that of [9]:
If (d) the stone was a diamond,
then (v) the ring would be valuable.
The ring is not valuable (Not-v).
The stone is not a diamond (Not-d).
What practical use is the assessment of an
argument’s validity, if we already know the
premises are false? As far as judging its
soundness, none at all. It would be unsound
even if it were valid. No argument can be
considered sound if it is based on a lie, as this
one is. But if we are giving a critical evaluation
of an argument, we must be able to say why it
is unsound; and it would be incorrect to say
that this is invalid. What the above example
also shows is that valid reasoning can be
abused and exploited for persuasive purposes.
It is partly because [12] is valid that it looks
and sounds plausible. Andrea is persuaded,
dishonestly, to part with a precious possession
for a fraction of its value.
The validity or otherwise of an argument is
also important if we do not know the truth or
falsity of the premises. To see this, look at the
next example. It is about a ring, too, but this
time one that evidently does have a high value.
The question is: why does it have a high value?

7.2 Soundness and validity: a taste of logic  259

Activity
Read the following carefully and decide if you
think it is sound or unsound.
[13] No ring with a diamond that size
would sell for less than $20,000.
Miranda Marchi’s ring fetched
$50,000 in an auction, so the stone
in it has got to be a diamond.

Commentary
This time we are not told whether the reasons
are true or not, but let’s suppose they are, for
the sake of argument. Therefore we accept that
the stone in the ring is big enough to be worth
at least $20,000, if it’s a diamond; and we
accept that the ring really did fetch well over
that figure in an auction. Could these two
premises be true and still lead to a false
conclusion?
Yes, they could. There are all kinds of
circumstances under which the ring could
have sold for a very high price without being a
diamond. The buyer could have been a fool.
Alternatively Miranda Marchi could have been
a celebrated film star, who had worn the ring
(with a fake diamond in it) in her best-known
film. No one had ever pretended it was real; it
fetched a high price as a collector’s item.
There are many plausible scenarios under
which the premises could be true and the
conclusion false. So the argument is not
reliable. Unlike the ring that featured in the
previous example, which could not have been
a real diamond and have a value of $20, this
stone could have been a fake and still sell for
thousands. That possibility makes the
argument invalid – along with all arguments
that follow the same pattern.
A fair assessment of this argument would
therefore be: we don’t know if the premises are
true or not, but we can say that the argument
is unsound anyway, because the reasons do

260 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

not support the conclusion. Even if we later
find out that the conclusion was in fact true,
and the ring did contain a genuine diamond,
the argument would still remain a fraud!

Deductive standards – and limitations
The arguments examined in this chapter –
even the more natural ones – have been
deductive in character. The standard of
validity required for a deductive argument is
very strict and unbending. Deductive
arguments are intended to draw conclusions
with absolute certainty. The kind of proofs
that logicians and mathematicians use depend
on rigid deductive arguments, and nothing
less will do. But some quite ordinary reasoning
can also be interpreted as deduction, as we
have seen in several of the examples.
Partly because deductive arguments are so
watertight, they can be rather limited, too. For
a conclusion to follow validly from its premises,
the premises have to be stronger than the
conclusion. To use the more technical term, the
premises must entail the conclusion. It is often
said that if we know the premises of a deductive
argument, the conclusion itself tells us nothing
we did not know already. There is something in
this. Certainly if we know that all true fish do
have gills, and that whales have no gills, then
we really do not need to add that whales are not
fish. In a way, deductive arguments are more
like proofs explaining why something is true,
than means to discovering new facts or
supporting new hypotheses.
By no means all argument is deductive.
Moreover, not all reasoning requires the same
level of certainty from the conclusion. Often it
is sufficient to be able to say that the truth of a
claim that is supported by an argument is
beyond reasonable doubt, or even that it is
more likely than not to be true – i.e. true on
the balance of probabilities.
In the next chapter we turn our attention to
certain kinds of non-deductive reasoning, and
arguments which fall short of deductive
validity, but still have powerful persuasive force.

Summary
• The soundness of an argument depends
on two factors: (1) the truth of the
reasons; and (2) whether or not they
adequately support the conclusion.
• There are different standards for judging
(2), depending on the type of inference
being made.

• The highest standard for judging (2) is that
of deductive validity. But there are other
standards by which to judge the reliability
of an argument.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Are either, neither, or both of these two
arguments sound – and why?
[A]	Citrus fruits have a sharp, acidic

taste. Lemons taste sharp and
acidic. Therefore lemons are citrus
fruits.
[B]	Citrus fruits have a sharp, acidic
taste. Lemons are citrus fruits. So
lemons have a sharp, acidic taste.
2 Comment on the following argument.
	A real diamond is so hard it will
scratch glass. But when we drew a line
on the glass with the stone in your
ring it didn’t leave any mark at all,
however hard we pressed. Therefore it
is not a real diamond.
3 What can you say about the soundness of
this argument?
	If the vice-president were guilty of
corruption, as you say he is, he would
be in prison, not on an official state visit
to South America. He is not in prison.
In fact he is in Chile right now and is

flying on to Argentina tomorrow, and
he will not be back until next week.
Therefore he is not corrupt.
4 Suggest a conclusion – if there is one –
which can validly be drawn from each of
the following sets of premises. If it is valid,
show or explain the form that the argument
would take.
[A]	If an athlete has accepted prize or
sponsorship money, that makes
him or her a professional.
Nathan is sponsored by a major
software company. So . . .
[B]	If an athlete has accepted prize or
sponsorship money, that makes
him or her a professional. Eunice
is not a professional. So . . .
[C]	If an athlete has accepted prize or
sponsorship money, that makes
him or her a professional. Abbas
has not accepted any prize or
sponsorship money. So . . .
Answers and comments are on pages 339–40.

7.2 Soundness and validity: a taste of logic  261

7.3 Non-deductive reasoning
Consider the following simple demonstration.
(You probably saw it at elementary school.) A
candle is placed in a shallow dish of water and
lit. A jar is then held over the candle so that
its rim is underwater to seal it from the air.

sixth time, the candle will go out. But, if you
were asked to spell out the argument, it might
go something like this:
[1] Every time a lighted candle is placed in a
sealed and restricted space (such as a
jar) it has been observed to go out
shortly afterwards. Therefore we can
infer that it always will.

Activity
Is this a valid form of argument? Is [1] a good
argument?

Commentary and continuation

After a short while, the candle flame dies, and
some of the water rises inside the jar. The
procedure is exactly repeated three or four
times to demonstrate that it wasn’t a fluke.
The reason why the candle goes out, in
non-technical language, is that the flame burns
up the oxygen in the jar, and without oxygen
it can no longer burn.
You don’t need an argument to persuade
you that if you repeat the experiment a fifth or

262 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

The answer to the first question is no. It is not
valid. [1] is an example of a fallacy that is
sometimes called ‘appealing to history’. It is
claiming that because something has been
observed to be the case in the past, it will
always be so in the future. We can assume that
the single premise in [1] is true. It is based on
direct evidence, verified by a great many
experiments and demonstrations, none of
which has ever been observed to have a
different outcome. But the inference that this
will always be the case cannot be verified by
direct evidence. Therefore the premise could
be true and the conclusion false (under some
freak circumstance).
You could argue that the conclusion of [1]
was a practical certainty. The laws of physics
would have to change to make it false. But
logically it is still an uncertainty. Its truth may
be beyond reasonable doubt, in the world as we
know it, but it is not beyond all doubt, in all

possible worlds. Again, you could argue that
possible worlds don’t count; only the real
world counts. But in logic, and to many
scientists as well, possible worlds do count. We
human beings are quite intelligent, but our
knowledge is still restricted to a tiny bubble of
space-time. Using words like ‘always’ and
‘everywhere’ literally in our reasoning cannot
be justified by evidence or experience. So,
although [1] may seem a safe bet, it is not a safe
inference in any deductive sense.

Induction
You should have noticed that the first
question was about the form of reasoning in
[1]. Even if you were satisfied that [1] itself
made a good case and justified its conclusion
beyond reasonable doubt, that does not mean
that every argument with the same form as [1]
would be as reliable or as persuasive.
We call arguments like [1] ‘inductive’, to
distinguish them from deductive arguments.
Induction does not establish certainty. Instead
its conclusions come with varying degrees of
probability. In strictly logical terms an
inductive argument is invalid, because it is
theoretically possible for the premises to be
true and the conclusion false, however
unlikely this may be. Inductive arguments are
therefore judged not by their validity or
invalidity, but by the strength of the evidence
that they provide and the degree of probability
it gives to the conclusion.
One problem with induction is that
evidence for any general hypothesis is always
limited to a finite number of experiments or
observations or examples. No matter how
many times a hypothesis is confirmed by an
observation, there is always the possibility that
the next one will be the exception. One of the
best-known examples of this weakness in
inductive reasoning is the case of the black
swan. For many centuries it was believed –
with good reason – that all swans were white,

because every swan that had ever been
observed was white. That was until a species of
black swan was discovered in Australia.
The premise that only white swans had been
observed up to that date was true, and remains
so. But the inference that therefore all swans
are white was then seen to be false. The great
Scottish philosopher David Hume pointed out
the general problem with induction. The
problem, put very simply, is that to argue in
the way that [1] does, one has to assume that
the future will be like the past. But the only
real evidence that we can have for this
assumption is that the future has always
been like the past, in the past! So the argument
is circular, and we are back where we started.
But although inductive reasoning does not
guarantee the truth of its conclusions, and
sometimes yields false ones, we still draw
inferences from repeated experiences and
observations. Indeed, scientific reasoning is
routinely based on such evidence, and proves
to be highly reliable. Also, the problem of
induction is not really a practical problem.
Rational people, including scientists, do not
make a habit of making such crude inductive
arguments as the one above. There is no need
to say that candles in sealed jars will always
go out. It is enough to say that they always
have, and that there is no reason to think
that this will change. The problem can be
avoided by simply not overstating
conclusions, and recognising that good
inductive arguments increase the probability
of the conclusion up to and beyond any
reasonable doubt.

Argument to the best explanation
Anyway, what is of interest scientifically is
not whether candles will always go out in
sealed containers, but why they go out. It has
not always been known that burning, or
combustion, involves the absorption of
oxygen (oxidation). From classical times until

7.3 Non-deductive reasoning 263

relatively recently combustible materials were
believed to contain a mysterious
undetectable substance called ‘phlogiston’,
which they gave off when they burned, to be
absorbed by the air. The reason the candle
goes out was thought to be that the air in the
jar could only absorb so much phlogiston:
quite the reverse of the oxidation theory that
we now learn at school. One problem with
the phlogiston theory was that burning
should have resulted in a loss of substance to
the air, and hence a loss of weight. The
discovery that combustible matter when
burned gained weight was the beginning of
the end for the theory – although some
scientists clung to it by claiming that
phlogiston had negative weight, making it
even more mysterious.
The idea of phlogiston was accepted for
centuries because at the time it seemed to
explain combustion. It was the best
explanation around, until oxidation was
understood. The argument for phlogiston was
that if there were such a substance, it would
explain why the candle went out in a
confined space. It did not, however, explain
why burnt matter (ash etc.) gained weight
without extra complications such as negative
mass. Nor could it explain, simply, why the
water level rises in the jar. If phlogiston were
added to the air during burning, then
arguably it should have forced the water level
down! You will recall (from Chapter 4.2) that
explanations are generally assessed by their
scope (how much they can explain) and their
simplicity. Once understood, the theory of
oxidation explained more than phlogiston
did, and much more simply. It didn’t need
implausible extra accounts as to why it
couldn’t be detected, or weighed less than
nothing. The argument for oxidation is
therefore much more compelling.
The fact that something is the best or
most believable explanation is often used as

264 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

a reason for arguing that it is true. Not
surprisingly, reasoning of this kind is known
as argument (or inference) to the best
explanation. As this is a mouthful, we’ll
shorten it to ABE. (It has also been given the
name ‘abduction’.) ABE or abduction is not
found only in science. It is actually one of
the commonest ways in which we reason in
everyday situations; so much so that we are
often barely conscious that we are reasoning
at all. A classic example is my coming out of
the house in the morning and finding the
ground in the garden soaking wet. If it had
rained heavily in the night, that would
explain this observation simply and
plausibly; so I take it that it has rained, and
think no more about it. In fact, if it had not
rained in the night, I would be very
surprised.
ABE is a powerful and familiar method of
reasoning. But as we have seen in several
previous chapters, it carries a high risk of
jumping to conclusions. It therefore has to be
used and evaluated with care. ABE supports
hypotheses; it does not establish facts. Recall
the example of the origin of ‘posh’ (Chapter
4.2, page 141). The claim that it was an
acronym from ‘Port Out, Starboard Home’
seems such a plausible explanation that it is
often accepted without further thought. It
turns out there is little evidence to support it
other than its elegant explanatory properties.
So, we must either abandon it or look for
additional supporting evidence. ABE is not
sufficient on its own to make an inference
safe. Returning to my wet garden: if I later
discovered that the ground everywhere else
in the neighbourhood was dry, I would
obviously have to think again about the
seemingly obvious inference that it had
rained in the night. To explain the dry
ground elsewhere, as well as my wet garden, I
would need a more local explanation such as
a burst water pipe.

Activity
Which of the following are examples of
argument to the best explanation, and why?
How safe are their conclusions? (The second
question applies only to the examples of ABE.)
A My coffee is barely warm so it must
have been made some time ago.
B These bushes won’t survive because
they’re not getting enough sun.
C Head injuries from cycling are very
common. Not only do they cost lives,
they cost the health service millions of
dollars of taxpayers’ money every year.
The wearing of cycling helmets on public
highways should therefore be
compulsory. It’s illegal in most countries
to drive without a seatbelt on. Cycling
should not be treated differently.
D Most land mammals have a dense
coating of fur. Humans, by contrast,
have little hair and a thicker than
normal layer of fat, more like aquatic
mammals than the ancestral apes.
Humans are also unusual in habitually
walking upright. The obvious conclusion
is that a large part of human evolution
took place in a watery environment,
where fat would provide insulation and
wading on two legs would be the
natural way to move.

B and C are not cases of ABE. ABE proceeds
from an observed fact to a hypothesis which
would explain the fact, and explain it better
than other hypotheses would. In B the
conclusion is a prediction based on an
observation. C is a recommendation based on
a claim about cost, and supported by a
comparison between cycling and driving. In
neither case is the conclusion justified by what
it supposedly explains.
D is a clear case of arguing from observed
facts to an explanatory hypothesis. There are
three observations: (1) that humans have less
hair than most land mammals; (2) that they
have more fat; (3) that they walk upright. D is
giving support to what is known as the
‘Aquatic Ape Theory’: a claim advanced by
some anthropologists that for a considerable
time during their evolution humans took to
the water as their natural environment. D
claims that this theory is the obvious
conclusion because if it were true it would
explain all three of the observed facts at a
stroke. The Aquatic Ape Theory is a nice one,
and it certainly does offer a plausible
explanation for many differences that are
found between humans and other primates
or mammals generally. However, D itself is a
one-sided argument. It does not acknowledge
that there may be other explanations that are
just as persuasive. It is overstating the case
therefore to say that it is the obvious
conclusion.

Commentary

Argument from analogy

The two examples of ABE are A and D. Having
observed that my coffee is barely warm, it
would then be no surprise to learn that it had
been made some time before. That would be a
plausible explanation, and therefore a
plausible hypothesis. However, that is by no
means the only possible, or even plausible,
explanation for lukewarm coffee. The water
may not have been allowed to boil. It may
have been made in the belief that I don’t
drink my coffee hot. And so on.

A third line of non-deductive reasoning that is
very frequently used is argument from analogy
(AfA). An analogy is a comparison, an
observed similarity. In C, above, an analogy is
drawn between cycling helmets and seatbelts.
The comparison is an obvious one: both
devices are designed to reduce injury in the
event of an accident. The assumption in the
argument is that they do. Its conclusion is that
the same rule should apply to both cycling
and driving.

7.3 Non-deductive reasoning 265

Argument from analogy has the following
general form: If such-and-such a thing is true
of X, and Y is like X (in the relevant respect),
then the same thing is true of Y. So, if one
ought to be made to wear a seatbelt in a car,
one ought to be made to wear a helmet on a
bike, because – arguably – there is no relevant
difference.

Activity
Do you accept this argument? Is the analogy
in C fair, or fit for purpose as a premise in the
argument?

Commentary
This will be quite brief. The answer to the first
question is up to you: evaluating arguments of
this sort very often comes down to whether
you think the analogy is a good one or not. But
that does not mean that arguments from
analogy cannot be evaluated with some
objectivity. The heart of the matter is whether
or not the analogy is a fair one: whether the
two things being compared are sufficiently
alike for the conclusion to apply to both of
them. The key phrase in this is the one in
brackets and italics above: ‘in the relevant
respect’. Why must this be added?
The reason is this: an argument from
analogy does not depend on the compared
objects being exactly alike, or alike in every
respect, for they would then be identical.
Indeed, some of the best AfA compare objects
which are in many respects quite different.
(We’ll see an example of one shortly.) In C the
analogy is between cycling helmets and
seatbelts. It does not demolish the argument
to point out that one goes on your head and
the other across the lap and over the shoulder.
The relevant respect is the alleged reduction of
injury that both devices are meant to bring;
and in that respect, they are closely analogous.
When evaluating an AfA, therefore, it is
essential to bear this qualification in mind. An

266 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

objection to the argument that merely points
out random differences has little value. The
relevance of the comparison must be
considered. With that in mind, it is really
quite difficult to fault C. If it is right to make
people wear seatbelts, on the grounds that it
saves both lives and public money, then it is a
very fair point that cyclists should take the
same precautions, and face the same
compulsions. You might say that bicycles are
slower than cars; but unless that translates
into fewer accidents or injuries, that is
irrelevant. You might be tempted to object that
cyclists have a right to take risks with their
own lives. But that would apply to drivers and
the wearing of seatbelts too. The analogy
remains fair – in the relevant respect.
Argument from analogy is especially
effective in counter-arguments and debates.
Here is an example of two people – we’ll call
them K and J – disputing the merits of reality
television, especially the programme called Big
Brother, in which a number of people are
confined to a house and filmed night and day.
We take up the debate at a point where J has
just said that the Big Brother housemates are
‘manipulated and exploited like circus animals’.
(There is one analogy already.) She goes on:
 J:	That pathetic lot in the house think they
are celebrities, when really they are just
sad little victims making fools of
themselves for public entertainment.
And the only reality is they’re too stupid
to know it.
K: Don’t you think that’s a bit patronising?
J:
It’s the truth.
K:	How do you know? You never watch it;
you’ve admitted that. You can’t criticise
something you’ve never watched.
J:	Yes I can. I’ve never watched a public
execution, but I know it’s wrong.
Therefore I wouldn’t watch.
K: That’s different, and you know it.
J:
What’s different about it?
K: No one’s killed on Big Brother.

J:
Give it time.
K:	Don’t be ridiculous. It’s just harmless fun.
J:	Now there you are wrong. Fun it may be:
that’s a matter of opinion. But Big
Brother is not harmless. People are
seriously damaged by being in that
house. Not physically, but mentally. You
can’t imprison people together like that,
knowing they are on camera day and
night, without it affecting their
personalities. You only have to look at
them when they’re interviewed
afterwards to know they are not the
same person they were when they went
in. So it’s a very dangerous game they’re
playing. Any psychiatrist will tell you that.
K:	They have psychiatrists monitoring the
housemates all the time, looking out for
danger signs.
J:	They have doctors watching boxing
matches, but boxers still get braindamaged. Some even die from their
injuries.
K:	There you go again: executions, violent
sports. What are you going to drag
in next?
J:	I’m just making the point that Big
Brother is a sick spectacle. And it’s
people like you who watch it that keep
it going . . .
K:	Well if that’s the case, you are in no
position to point the finger. You watch
motor-racing.
J:
So?
K:	People only watch that because they’re
waiting for an accident to happen,
preferably nasty. Fatal even. And you call
that entertainment. . .

Activity
Identify two or three examples of the use of
analogy in the above dialogue, and discuss
what they contribute to each speaker’s
argument.

Commentary
The first and perhaps most interesting analogy
is the one that J makes when she is told that
she can’t criticise what she hasn’t watched.
The analogy she draws is with watching a
public execution. This is the example
promised earlier, in which there is a major
difference between the items being compared.
K is quick to point this out: Big Brother is
different, she says, because no one is killed on
the show. J jokes that it may happen one day.
K dismisses this as ridiculous.
But J’s argument is not ridiculous, despite
the difference in physical harm to the
respective ‘victims’. At this point J is
countering the claim that people cannot
criticise something they have never watched.
But, she says, you can criticise public
executions without going to see them. If you
can criticise one you can criticise the other. J is
not seriously saying that the two spectacles are
the same in their consequences or extremity.
She is just saying that they can both
legitimately be criticised. Nonetheless you
might have felt that the analogy goes too far,
implying that reality TV is in some way brutal,
and that you can know this without even
watching it. There is room for disagreement
about this part of the argument, and that is
what makes it an interesting exercise.
The next example is more straightforward. J
says that there are psychological dangers in
the reality show; K says that psychiatrists are
there to spot them and prevent them. J draws
the analogy with ringside doctors at boxing
matches, who do not always spot the harm
before it happens. It is a fair comparison to
draw, since both are medical safeguards. If one
can fail, it is at least reasonable to question the
reliability of the other.
There is possibly a third analogy that you
may have identified towards the end: the
comparison between watching motor-racing
and watching Big Brother. But if this is an
argument, it is a fallacious one. It is basically
arguing that if it’s all right to watch cars crash

7.3 Non-deductive reasoning 267

for entertainment, it’s all right to watch Big
Brother, the implication being that identifying
nasty things about one spectacle justifies the
unpleasantness of the other. But surely K is
supposed to be defending Big Brother. It is a
weak defence to say that it is no nastier than
something else that is nasty.

Tu quoque
This is another classic fallacy to add to your
file. Tu quoque means literally ‘you too’. More
explicitly it means responding to a criticism or
objection by saying that the other person, or
other people, are guilty of the same thing. At
the lowest level it is quite a childish argument,

effectively breaking the rule that two wrongs
do not make a right. It is also a form of ad
hominem argument (see Chapter 4.9) when
directed at someone personally, as in this case.
K is saying: ‘You watch a dangerous sport, so
you can’t criticise me for watching reality TV.’
Note that tu quoque arguments can take a
more general form. I am committing the same
reasoning error, for example, if I say that I
cannot be criticised for doing something
because lots of people do it too. The fact that
lots of people break the speed limit or drop
litter or tell lies does not make any of these acts
less wrong.

Summary
• In this chapter we have looked at three
frequently used forms of non-deductive
argument:
• induction
• argument to the best explanation
• argument from analogy.

• It is an important analytical skill to be able
to recognise these forms and to evaluate
them appropriately.

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Clive is an experienced hill-walker. For 25
years he spent most of his leisure time
backpacking in wild country, living off the
land, sleeping in the open and finding his
way, sometimes in uncharted regions. He
refuses to use satnav. His most valued
possession is a compass, which he says
has saved his life on numerous occasions,
especially in bad weather and poor
visibility. Only once, on a ridge in Scotland
in thick cloud, did he get dangerously lost,
not knowing that the rock in certain places
contained minerals which can attract a
compass needle and distort the reading.
When the cloud lifted he realised that he
had strayed a long way off course.
What does the above anecdote imply
about inductive reasoning?

268 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

2 Analyse and critically evaluate J’s longest
argument in the dialogue on pages 266–7
(the speech which begins ‘Now there you
are wrong . . .’).
3 (Harder task) Find out more about the
Aquatic Ape Theory, and some of the
arguments that are raised for and against it.
	Write a short essay either supporting or
challenging the theory.
Answers and comments are on page 340.

7.4 Reasoning with statistics
A leading politician once summed up his
approach to law and order with the now
famous slogan:
[1]

‘Prison works.’

But does it? Does it, for example, reduce
crime? Do the authorities make law-abiding
citizens safer by locking up criminals? Does
prison deter people from committing crimes
in the first place, or from reoffending after
serving a sentence?
In this chapter we shall be considering ways
in which questions like these can be answered:
what sort of evidence is required to support or
to challenge the claim expressed by [1]? We
shall be looking in particular at the use of
statistical evidence, and statistical reasoning.
As well as considering ways in which statistics
can legitimately be used to support claims, we
will also be looking at ways in which they can
give false or misleading impressions. It is fairly
obvious why statistical evidence is needed in a
context such as this. It would be hard to see
how any grounds could be given either for or
against [1] without producing facts and
figures: numbers of prisoners, levels of crime,
lengths of sentence, rates of reoffending and

so on. If someone said to you: ‘Prison works
because it reduces crime,’ you would be
entitled to ask for some proof of this, or at least
some indication that locking people up does
bring down the crime figures.
You would also be entitled to ask whether
some observed reduction in crime would be a
sufficient condition for claiming that prison
works. (Necessary and sufficient conditions
were discussed in Chapter 7.1.) For a start, we
would need to be sure that it is prison that is
responsible for the reduction. It would be
wrong to assume that because crime numbers
were falling, and prison policy getting
tougher, that one was the cause or the
consequence of the other. And even if we were
satisfied that prison sentences do reduce
crime, we might still want to know by how
much they reduce it. If it turned out that a
very large increase in the number and severity
of prison sentences was needed to achieve a
small reduction in crime, we might well
question whether this showed that prison was
really as effective as the author of [1] would
have people believe.

Interpreting statistical data
In Chapter 4.3 the distinction was made
between raw data and processed data. Raw
statistics are just numbers, or quantities. If we
want to use them we have to interpret them,
and draw inferences from them. They do not
come with inferences and interpretations
attached. Statistics on their own don’t make
points or support arguments or answer
questions. They are used by people to do these
things, and for that purpose they usually need
to be processed in some way: for example,
combined or contrasted with other statistics;

7.4 Reasoning with statistics 269

multiplied, divided, rounded, converted into
percentages, plotted on graphs and so on.
Raw data is not necessarily altered by
processing – unless, of course, it is deliberately
falsified. Even so, the same data can be presented
in ways that support different inferences, some
perhaps more justified than others. It is how
statistics are used and presented therefore that
requires critical attention. As far as the raw
material is concerned we either believe it or we
don’t. (Grounds for believing or disbelieving a
claim were discussed in the chapters on
credibility in Unit 4.) But even if we believe the
data, and are satisfied with its accuracy, we may
still question the way it has been interpreted.
Like any argument, the premises can be true but
the reasoning still flawed. Statistical reasoning is
no different in this respect.
Here is a simple illustrative example. Take the
raw statistic that in 2010 there were 2.3 million
people in prison in the USA. (To be precise this
has already undergone some processing
because it has been rounded to the nearest
100,000, and presumably averaged over the
year. But within these bounds, it is either true or
false; we’ll assume it is true.) It is another fact
that in Germany the corresponding number
was a little over 67,000. These facts may come as
a surprise. They may prompt someone to argue
that the number of prisoners in the USA is
excessive or unnecessary, or inhumane, given
that the contrast is so striking between two
developed, and in many ways similar,
countries. But the numbers themselves do not
carry those implications. What is more, they
cannot be used in their raw form either to
strengthen or to weaken any such conclusion.

‘Like with like’
One way in which statistics may mislead is by
comparing total numbers with proportions.
Suppose I did want to argue that the rate of
imprisonment in the USA was excessive, by
comparing it with that of another developed,
prosperous, democratic country. The two
figures above would be quite inadequate,

270 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

simply because they are not proportions: they
are bald totals. If I supported my claim by
simply observing that there were 34 times as
many prison inmates in the USA as in
Germany, that would not be a false statement,
but it would be a misleading one in the
context of my argument. To compare the two
facts in any fair and meaningful way we need
the populations of the two countries as well as
the number of prisoners. The population of
the USA, as of 2011, was 312 million (in round
figures); that of Germany 82 million. We can
enter these numbers into a table, and calculate
the rates of imprisonment as follows:

TABLE 1
Total
Prisoners
population
(millions)
Germany
USA

Prisoners
per
100,000
population

82

67,000

82

312

2,300,000

737

The first two columns of the table contain the
(more or less) raw data; the third the processed
data. The processed data permits us to
compare like with like. We can now argue
legitimately that the proportion of the US
population that is in prison is around nine
times that of Germany: still a significant and
striking difference, but a long way short of 34
times! The difference may still fail to establish
that the number and length of prison
sentences are excessive. That remains a value
judgement, depending on what one means by
‘excessive’, and requiring rather more
information than we have in the table. But at
least the intermediate conclusion – the
contrast between the Germany and USA
rates – now has a firm evidential base.

Selectivity
A second way in which data may mislead is
due to selectivity: choosing facts which suit a
theory or hypothesis and/or omitting those
which do not. One of the obvious weaknesses

of the data in Table 1 is that it compares the
USA with just one other country. What is
more, the country in question contrasts
sharply with the USA in terms of its rate of
imprisonment. If there are other countries
with similarly low prison populations to that
of Germany then we might have a stronger
case for the claim that the USA figure is
excessive, on the grounds that other countries
can get by with many fewer and shorter prison
sentences. If instead we found that Germany
was atypical, and the USA was more in line
with international levels, then we would have
to concede that the argument was weakened.

Activity
Study the following bar chart.

CHART 1
Imprisonment worldwide
Inmates per 100,000 population
Selected countries, 2012 or latest available
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
USA
Russia

730
511

Brazil
Iran
Britain
China
Canada
France
Germany
Japan

1 Discuss how you would interpret the
statistical data in Chart 1.
2 Does it lend support to the following claim?
[2] The USA locks up too many people.
In particular, look for ways in which the data
might be used or presented in ways which
could mislead or influence the reader.

Commentary
The first thing to do when faced with any
statistical document is to clarify precisely what
it conveys. This is particularly important with
graphs or other visual documents, because
they create impressions as well as presenting
facts. A table of figures is closer to the raw data
than a graph or chart. A graph or chart, on the
other hand, is easier to read, because some of
the interpreting has already been done. That is
both an advantage and a danger, since visual
representations can obscure important details
and/or exaggerate others.
Chart 1 extends the information in Table 1
to ten countries instead of just two. Its
calculations are based on raw data, rather than
rounded figures, so the rates are slightly
different from those in Table 1. It tells us that
among these ten countries the USA has the
highest proportion of prisoners. But it also
shows that Germany is well down the list, with
only Japan imprisoning fewer; and it shows
that there are many countries with numbers
closer to the USA than Germany has.

Scale
At a glance the message might appear that
there is a fairly even spread, with three
countries, Russia, Brazil and Iran, not very far
behind the USA. It looks from the chart as if
the numbers increase gradually from the
lowest rate of imprisonment to the highest.
On closer inspection, however, we see that two
of the bars are not drawn to the same scale as
the others. The jagged white line indicates that
a section of the bar is missing, or that it is
‘truncated’ (meaning shortened). Drawn to
scale, as in Chart 2 on the next page, the bar
for the USA should be nearly three times as
long as Brazil’s, and over seven times as long
as France’s. Even in comparison with its
nearest rival, Russia, the USA imprisons 25%
more of every 100,000 population.
Chart 1 is not inaccurate, but visually it
could be misleading. It illustrates the need to
study graphs carefully, and not be influenced

7.4 Reasoning with statistics 271

CHART 2
Imprisonment worldwide
Inmates per 100,000 population
Selected countries, 2012 or latest available
0

50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600 650 700 750

USA
Russia
Brazil
Iran
Britain
China
Canada
France
Germany
Japan

by purely visual impressions. Interestingly, it is
not clear whether the truncating device
actually minimises the difference between the
USA, Russia and the other countries, or
exaggerates it by showing them as ‘off the
scale’. In its original context this graph came
with the caption ‘Exceptional America’, and
was part of a report that was critical of high
rates of imprisonment. So it may be that the
author wanted to make a point by emphasising
the gap. You can compare the two charts,
Chart 1 and Chart 2, and decide which you
think presents the data more strikingly.

Selectivity again
So does the data in Chart 1 support the
inference, or strengthen the argument, that
the rate is too high? Not really. For one thing it
still represents only a selection of countries,
and we have no information on why the
particular selection was made. It would have
to be established that there were not other
countries with comparable or even higher
proportions of their populations in jail.
Besides, for a statement like [2], we need more
and different data than mere comparisons
between countries. For instance, we would

272 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

need to know why the rate is higher in one
country than another, whether there were
special circumstances which necessitate or
justify a tougher prison policy. It is time to get
back to our first question: whether or not
prison works. If the rate has to be high to be
effective, then perhaps it is wrong to say the
rate of imprisonment in the USA is excessive.

Activity
Read the following short comment from a
law-enforcement website:
[3] Prison works. Not only are those
inside prison prevented from
committing crimes, those outside
are deterred from committing
crimes by the knowledge that they
will face long sentences if caught.
Besides, the facts speak for
themselves: more prison, less crime.
John Keyes, Indiana, USA
T o what extent do Charts 3 and 4, based on
official records, support the above argument?

In answering the question you will need to
critically assess the statistics represented
by the graphs as evidence for [3]. You are
not asked to assess the accuracy of the
data: assume it is correct. But do ask
yourself how clear and transparent the
presentation is. Does it hide or distort any
of the relevant information?

CHART 3
Reported crimes in the USA: 1960−2010
16,000,000
14,000,000
12,000,000
10,000,000
8,000,000
6,000,000
4,000,000
2,000,000
0
1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010

800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0

USA imprisonment rate: 1950–2008

19
5
19 0
5
19 5
6
19 0
6
19 5
7
19 0
7
19 5
8
19 0
8
19 5
9
19 0
9
20 5
0
20 0
0
20 5
10

Prisoners per 100,000 population

CHART 4

Commentary
Well, the facts (as presented in the graphs)
may speak for themselves, but do they speak
for Mr Keyes of Indiana? Chart 3 indicates that
reported crime in the USA rose sharply and
increasingly through the 1960s; and, with
occasional temporary falls, throughout the
1970s and 1980s too. It peaked around 1991 at
close to 15 million reported crimes. Over the
next two decades it fell back to just over

10 million, a decrease of 4.5 million, or 30%.
Meanwhile the numbers in prison (Chart 4),
which had been under 200 per 100,000 of the
population prior to the 1970s, rocketed over
the next three decades, with one small
reduction in the late 1990s and another
around 2009. The increase between 1970 and
2008 was over 360%.
So, for two decades – 1970 to 1990 – crime
rates and imprisonment both rose. But whilst
the imprisonment rate rose continuously, the
crime rate fell back three times before reaching
its peak. If the increasing imprisonment rate
was ‘working’ it looks as though it was
working for a time, then failing again. Then,
after 1991, with imprisonment still on the
same steep rise, crime began a more or less
steady descent. But we do not know what
happened after that, or what will happen in
the future. You must decide whether there is a
sufficiently strong pattern or trend in Chart 3
to make a reliable prediction, or to support
Keyes’ hypothesis.
Remember that the task you were set was to
criticise the data as evidence. This does not
mean that there is anything wrong with the
data itself. The graphs are based on official
statistics, and therefore come from reputable
and reliable sources. You are not asked to
assess their credibility. It is the interpretation
that we are concerned with. The question is
whether the statistics:
A positively support [3]
B fail to support [3]
C contradict or disprove [3].
The answer is almost certainly B; and here are
some reasons why. Firstly, even if the data is
interpreted as a strong correlation between
the rise in imprisonment rates and the fall in
crime rates (which is questionable on the
basis of Chart 3), there is nothing to indicate
which is the cause and which the effect. In
Chapter 2.10, and several times in Unit 4, the
fallacy of assuming cause on the basis of
correlation was discussed, and you should

7.4 Reasoning with statistics 273

have realised that [3] makes this assumption.
Surely it is just as plausible that the causal
connection is the reverse: that an explosive
rise in crime has pushed the prison
population higher and higher. If so, it is
crime that is ‘working’, and the slogan should
be: ‘More crime, more prison!’
Why would reported crime then fall as it
did from 1991? Well, there are plenty of
possible reasons. One is that the police may
have become better at solving crimes, and that
conviction rates have risen accordingly. That
would reduce crimes and result in more
criminals going to jail, and thus explain both
graphs. It would not mean that prison was
working, but that detection and prosecution
were working. It is possible, too, that there was
merely a reduced rate of reported crime, or a
change in the way crime is classified and
recorded. That sometimes happens as
politicians try to reassure the public that the
fight against crime is being won, and they
have less to fear. So long as there are other
plausible ways in which the trend in Charts 3
and 4 can be explained, the claim that prison
is the driving force is weakened.
Be careful, however, not to swing too far in
the other direction, towards option C. Doubt
about the support that the statistics give to [3]
does not mean that [3] must be false. In fact
the data that can be read off from the graphs
gives no more support to the claim that prison
does not work than to the claim that it does.

lacking from the experiment is a second group
in which prison sentences are reduced, or held
at the same level, to see what effect that has. If
this, the ‘control’ group, shows no reduction
in crime, then it would support the case for
the effectiveness of prison. But if the outcomes
in the control group were the same as in the
main group – or even resulted in a bigger
reduction – then the argument that prison
works would be severely weakened.
Obviously one whole population cannot be
subjected to both experiments, main and
control, at the same time. But different regions
with different crime-fighting policies can be
compared. Similarly, different periods in
history, when different methods were in
operation, can also be compared. Chart 5 on
the next page is an example of such a
comparison.

No control group

Commentary

Another way in which statistical information
may mislead is by giving only one side of the
picture. What is missing from the data is what
researchers refer to as a control group. If we
think of the period of time during which the
prison numbers rose as an ‘experiment’, we
can see what this means. The experiment was
performed on a whole population, and the
observed outcome was that as prison numbers
rose, crime figures rose and then fell. What is

Clearly this bar chart is intended to counter
the claim that prison works. As they stand, the
statistics are impressive. Over the ten-year
period from 1999 to 2009, when imprisonment
was rising generally across the USA and crime
falling, the state of New York saw a reduction
in its prison population and an accelerated fall
in crime, compared with the state of Indiana
which had a huge rise in its prison population
and a much smaller fall in crime.

274 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

Activity
Comment critically on the statistical
information in Chart 5 and the claims made
on the strength of them.
Can the following claim, from the headline of
the document, reliably be inferred?
[4] We can be safer when we imprison
fewer people.
(Keep in mind what you already know from
Charts 3 and 4.)

CHART 5

UNLOCKING AMERICA
We can be safer when we imprison fewer people

NEW YORK
STATE

INDIANA
Population in 2009 :
6.4 million

Population in 2009 :
19.5 million

47%

PRISON
RATE

CRIME
RATE

CRIME
RATE
PRISON
RATE

–8%

–20%
–29%

New York’s prison rate decreased
by 20% from 1999 to 2009.
Its crime rate fell by 29% in the same period.

Indiana’s prison rate rose by 47%
between 2000 and 2010, but from
2000 to 2009 its crime rate only fell by 8%.

New York prison rates from ‘Downscaling Prisons’, a report by The Sentencing Project
Indiana prison rates from the Justice Reinvestment Project
Uniform Crime Reporting Statistics from the US Department of Justice.

7.4 Reasoning with statistics 275

Let’s look at the numbers. From Chart 3 we
know that in the same decade crime fell
nationally by around 1.8 million from 12
million, which is approximately 15%. New
York’s crime rate fell by almost twice that,
29%. Indiana’s fell by a mere 8%. From Chart 4
we can calculate that the national increase in
prisoners per 100,000 was around 7% over the
relevant period. Indiana’s was a massively
inflated 47%, whilst New York, as we see, saw a
reduction of 20%. This amounts to one in every
five prisoners being released without being
replaced.
New York certainly ‘bucks the trend’.
Compared with the national pattern, it is an
anomaly. But does it prove anything in general
terms? The answer has to be no.
Generalisations drawn from particular cases
are always questionable, as you will recall from
discussions earlier in the book (see Chapter
2.10). Anomalies, likewise, can very often be
‘explained away’ (see Chapter 4.2, pages
140–1), which lessens their impact. In the last
section it was suggested that falls in crime can
have many other causes besides high rates of
imprisonment. New York’s police may have
done a better job than Indiana’s. New York
may have fewer of the social problems that
lead to crime. The fact is that if there are fewer
crimes – for whatever reason – there will be
fewer people being sent to prison and
replacing those who are leaving; so of course
prison numbers will fall. That does not mean
that releasing prisoners lowers crime. We have
the same problem as we had with claiming
that more prison meant less crime.
The problems with Chart 5 have more to do
with what we don’t know than what we do.
For one thing, the statistics do not tell us why
prisoners were released in New York. If they
had simply reached the end of their sentences,
and crime was declining anyway for other
reasons, then the prison population would fall
naturally and have nothing to do with a
deliberate policy to reduce offending. But
what we lack most of all is other statistics for

276 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

other states. Indiana and New York may be no
more than dramatic exceptions to the national
picture. There may even be states in which the
crime rate is falling more rapidly than in New
York, but in which prisons are also getting
fuller.

Sample may not be representative
This criticism of Chart 5 is one that can
frequently be levelled against statistics which
take samples. Firstly, the sample may be too
small to be representative of wider trends.
There are 50 US states with a total population
of over 300 million. New York and Indiana,
though large, account for less than 10% of the
national population. Secondly, because the
statistics come from just two states, they are
not a random selection, meaning that 90% of
the population are not represented at all.
Thirdly, it is very likely that the two states have
been selected deliberately because they
support the claim or claims being made.
Selection bias is almost certainly an issue with
these statistics.
Despite these critical comments, the data in
Chart 5 is not without significance. There are
inferences that can be drawn from it, though
not broad generalisations.

What can be inferred?
The specific inference that you were asked to
assess was not as strong as ‘Prison works’ or
‘Prison does not work’. It was simply the
contention that we can reduce our reliance on
prisons and be safer. With the emphasis on
‘can’, [4] can be understood as a much weaker
proposition than, say, [3]. It challenges the
claim that long prison sentences are the best
or only answer to crime, and suggests that
there may be other ways to tackle the problem.
On that understanding, the evidence for [4] is
much more compelling, because it is merely
registering that there may be another way of
doing things. It is not saying that we should
throw open the prison doors tomorrow and
expect to see law and order swiftly return. It is
saying that we should not assume that just

because crime rates have been falling, tough
sentencing is necessarily the explanation.
As far back as Unit 2 you were warned that
claims need to be measured so as not to require
too much from the reasons or evidence which
are given for them. This has been a useful

example. Statistics are powerful reasoning
tools. But what we infer from them needs to be
kept within bounds. When assessing statistical
reasoning, the big question is whether the
data is adequate for the claim or claims being
made.

Summary
• Statistical data is a form of evidence
that can be used to support claims and
underpin arguments.
• There is a difference between raw data,
which is neutral, and data which has been
processed for a particular purpose.
• Selecting statistical data may reflect bias.
• Critical assessment of statistics involves
looking for ways in which presentation
can mislead, by exaggerating, simplifying,

sampling selectively, etc. We must be
careful not to be ‘taken in’ by seemingly
impressive evidence.
• It also involves interpreting statistics fairly,
and assessing inferences that are made
on the strength of them. We should be
especially wary of inferences which are
too strong and/or too general, or which
assume a causal explanation from a mere
correlation or trend.

7.4 Reasoning with statistics 277

End-of-chapter assignments
1 Read the short extract. Also examine
Chart 6 below, which is related to the
same topic. Then answer the questions
that follow.
	Peaks in crime rates tend to be associated
with a significant reduction in the
prison population. Although this trend
can be observed in several countries, for
instance Denmark and Portugal, the
paradigm example is Italy. In 2007, the
total number of police-recorded offences
catapulted by over 160,000, following a
mass pardon of prisoners the previous
year. The crime rate only began to fall
once the prison population crept up
towards its 2006 level.
	Carolina Bracken (UK Daily Telegraph)

a Give a critical assessment of the
evidence provided in Chart 6. How
much corroboration does it give to the
claims in the newspaper extract? (Look
particularly carefully at the scales on
the graph: robberies on the left axis and
prison population on the right.)
b Based on the statistical data from both
sources, draw one precise, credible
inference about the relationship
between prison and crime.
2 Find a newspaper or magazine article
which uses statistical data to support
a claim or claims. Make one or more
critical comments on the way the data is
interpreted and presented, and give an
overall assessment of the claim(s) made
on the strength of the evidence.
Answers and comments are on pages 340–41.

CHART 6

4

4

6
45
5
55
Prison population (100,000)

Bank robberies per 100 banks
5
6
7
8

Graph showing incidences of bank robbery before and after the mass pardon of prisoners in
Italy in July 2007

1/04

1/05

Month of Prison

1/06
End of month/year

Robberies per 100 banks

278 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

1/07

1/08

Prison pop. (100,000)

7.5 Decision making
In some ways a decision is like a conclusion: a
judgement that can be supported by giving
reasons. A decision, together with the reasons,
makes up a kind of argument. On other
occasions, however, we find reasons being
given to explain a decision: to say why it is, or
was, the right decision in given circumstances.
It is interesting to note that the reasons for a
decision can be given before or after it has been
made and/or acted upon. A bank manager
looks at a company’s finances and, because
they are in poor shape, concludes – decides –
that it would be unwise to lend the company
any more money. But she could also say, after
having refused the loan, why she refused,
giving exactly the same reason. We can call the
first of these decision making; the second
explanation. Both involve justifying the
decision.
It is also interesting to note that decisions
are not necessarily made on the strength of
reasons. Sometimes we make ‘snap’ decisions,
act on impulse or on the spur of the moment;
or even against better judgement. On
occasions we might look at all the reasons for
and against some course of action, and
convince ourselves that it is better than others,
yet still decide to do the exact opposite. There
is a difference, therefore, between reasoning to
a decision, or making a rational decision, and
just deciding without good reason to do one
thing rather than another.
It is not always wrong, however, to make a
snap decision or to act against better
judgement. It depends on the circumstances.
If nothing hangs on the decision that you
make, then there is no need to spend time
weighing up the pros and cons. Also there are
occasions when there is insufficient time to

reason things through: something has to be
done, and it is better to do something than
nothing, whatever the ‘something’ may be.
Sometimes the rational decision means doing
something that is less fun or less exciting. A
not-very-talented golfer might go for a nearimpossible shot that will probably cost him
the hole, rather than a sensible one which
may result in winning. On the basis that golf
is just a game, and if it is not a serious
competition, the decision to gamble is not
stupid, even though the odds are against its
succeeding.

Reasoned decisions: choices and
their consequence
An important part of decision making is
judging what does and does not matter: what
is and is not important. That itself is a critical
judgement, similar to determining the
standard of proof that is needed to justify a
claim (see Chapter 2.2). When outcomes do
matter, and there is time to deliberate, we
want a reliable methodology to maximise the
chances of making the right choice. That
methodology is the topic of this chapter.
The central concepts affecting decision
making are choice and consequence. Obviously,
if we want to reach the best decision, we need
to be aware of what choices are available. You
will remember the fallacy of ‘restricting the
options’ in Chapter 4.7 (page 173). Decision
making is a practical reminder of why
reasoning can be undermined if all the
relevant possibilities are not considered. The
argument that if we cannot do X we must do Y
is valid only if there is no Z that is as feasible as
Y. Although this is a very obvious observation,
it is often overlooked in practice.

7.5 Decision making 279

Consequences are what follow from a
decision: the outcomes of actions. In practical
terms consequences are what determine
whether a decision is a good one or not. This,
too, is a very obvious point; but again it is easy
to ignore or play down the importance and/or
likelihood of some potential outcome, especially
when trying to justify a decision already partly
made, or favoured more than others.
A familiar example is the scenario of
deciding which of various products to buy,
particularly when it is a major item like a car, a
new bicycle, or computer. It is very easy to let
ourselves be persuaded by advertising, or by
pre-existing preferences, rather than by
predictable consequences. Take the choice
between buying a comparatively new and
therefore quite expensive car, or an older but
much cheaper one. If as a result of buying the
newer car you find you have taken on a debt
that you can’t meet, you may regret the
decision. On the other hand, if the older car
promptly breaks down and lands you with a
massive repair bill, or worse still has to be
scrapped, you may wish you had chosen the
more expensive but more reliable model.
Expressed in these general terms it seems
like a lottery. How can we know in advance
which of these possibilities will be the actual
outcome? We don’t. No one can pretend that
decision making, or prediction, is an exact
science. But that does not mean it is not a
rational activity, nor that it cannot be made
more reliable by approaching it in a
methodical rather than a random way. A
sound decision – as opposed to a random
choice – can only be made if it is informed; and
to be informed it must be based on some kind
of factual or statistical or quantifiable data.

Assessing consequences
This brings us to two key criteria by which
consequences can be critically assessed. The
criteria are:
1 probability (likelihood, chance)
2 value (importance, seriousness, cost).

280 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

(You will sometimes see the word ‘utility’ used
instead of ‘value’. Note also that the value, or
utility, of something can be zero, or even
negative: a liability rather than an asset.)
How do these two concepts figure in
rational decision making? The answer, if not
already obvious, is as follows.
Firstly (1): since we cannot always be sure
what the outcomes of a particular decision will
be, the best we can usually do is to estimate
how likely they are. In the case of the two cars,
we would naturally like to know what the
chances are of its developing a serious fault in
the foreseeable future. Taking the older car
first, the kind of factors we would consider
would be not just its age but the mileage it had
done, the number of owners it had had, its
service record, and so on. We might also want
to look at information in an auto magazine, or
ask someone with expertise how reliable such
makes and models are above a certain age and
mileage. We may want to consider the
reputation of the seller. If the answers to these
questions are all, or mostly, positive, this raises
the likelihood of getting – say – three good
years of use from the car. (Fewer than that
would mean the car had been poor value;
more would be a bonus.) If the answers are
mostly negative, the chances of this positive
outcome would be lowered.
‘Raised’, ‘lowered’ and ‘likely’ are still rather
vague notions. Ideally we would want a more
precise, quantifiable measure of the
probabilities. Statistically such figures will
exist, and can be found if you are prepared to
go to the trouble. Suppose a representative
sample of cars of a certain make, age and
mileage have been assessed for their reliability,
and it turns out that around 60% of them gave
their owners three years of trouble-free use,
whilst 40% developed one or more serious
problems, some irreparable. Now let’s suppose
that the statistics for the other, newer car in
our scenario, were 90% : 10% using the same
criteria. Which car would you buy?

Decision time
If you were asked at this point which car is the
better buy, you would be right to think it was a
silly question. Obviously the newer car is the
better buy. As that rather over-used saying
goes, it is a ‘no-brainer’ – meaning you don’t
need any intelligence to work it out. But the
question ‘Which would you buy?’ is a
different one and without more information
it is unanswerable. Yes, we can estimate from
the statistics that the likelihood of getting
three years of reliable use from the newer car
is 30 percentage points higher than for the
older model. But we have no way of placing a
measurable value on this. Value was the
second of the two criteria for assessing
consequences. The most obvious missing
information is the cost of the two cars
respectively, because it is that which is at stake
if the one we buy proves faulty. Nor is it just
the cost itself that is relevant, but the cost to
the buyer. If the buyer has lots of money, the
relative value is less than for someone on
modest income who has to watch what they
spend, and will feel the effects of an
unfavourable outcome more acutely. It is for
this reason that ‘importance’ is often a more
appropriate term to use than ‘value’ or ‘cost’.
So, let’s place a value on each car. Let’s say
that the older car is priced at $1200, and the
newer one at $4500. We can now pose the
question again, only this time with something
more concrete to go on. Which of the cars, Old
Car or New Car, would you opt for – and why?

Activity
Pause and discuss this question. In purely
practical and economic terms, which car is
the better buy for someone to whom financial
considerations matter significantly?

Commentary and continuation
Not all values and probabilities are
quantifiable ones. But in the example we are

considering they are quantifiable, which
makes the task more objective than it would
be otherwise. All we are asking is: Which
option, Old Car or New(er) Car, makes the
better economic sense? We can answer it by
setting the cost of each option against the
likelihood of a favourable outcome (or the risk
of an unfavourable one) and we can express
all this in numerical terms. We are defining a
favourable outcome as three years of troublefree use, and an unfavourable outcome as
anything less than this. The statistical
evidence suggests that there is (up to) a 0.4
probability that the older car will fail within
three years, with a worst-case scenario of
losing all of the $1200. The evidence also
suggests that there is a 0.1 probability that
the newer car will fail, with a worst-case
loss of $4500.
Mathematically this can be expressed as
follows:
Older:
$1200 × 0.4 = $480
Newer:
$4500 × 0.1 = $450
Difference: $30
In other words, if I multiply the value (i.e. the
cost) of an unfavourable outcome by the
chance of its happening, this tells me there are
slightly better grounds (statistically) for buying
the newer, more expensive car. However, the
difference is so small that it does not provide a
powerful reason for deciding one way or the
other. The conclusion we would draw from this
exercise is that there is very little to choose
between the two options when viewed in these
purely economic terms. This is not so
surprising, when we stop to think about it,
because by and large you get what you pay for,
and the marketplace reflects this: the reduced
reliability of an older car is matched by its lower
price; conversely the higher price of a newer
model is reflected in the likelihood of greater
reliability.
The above example is very simple, but it
provides us with a model of the way in which
consequences bear on decisions. If we wanted

7.5 Decision making 281

to give a more general, verbal account of the
factors affecting our decision, we might say
something along these lines:
‘If you buy the cheaper car you run a bigger risk
of wasting your money; but then you have less to
lose if it lets you down. Buy the newer one, and
you’ve much less chance of wasting your money,
but a lot more to lose if the worst does happen.’
Although the numbers have been left out, it is
clear that this statement still applies the same
basic principle (or methodology) of balancing
risk against cost, probability against value.

Quality not quantity
The principle can be seen at work even when
we consider a very different kind of scenario,
and one in which qualitative rather than
quantitative judgements have to be made.
Imagine you are on a trekking holiday:
 ith 5 km to go to your next camp you come
W
to a river-crossing with wet, slippery rocks.
Partway across there is a large gap. You are
not confident that you can jump the gap, but
the water is slow-moving, so in the likely event
of falling short, you will just have to walk the
remaining 5 km in wet clothes. There is of
course some risk of a minor injury: cut,
bruise, strain. You would have to be extremely
unlucky for there to be anything more serious,
though it is not strictly speaking impossible.
Freak accidents do happen: you could slip and
crack your head, or break your leg. A rational
decision must allow for this, but must be kept
in perspective too. The alternative option is a
4 km walk upstream to the nearest bridge,
which would add 8 km to an already long day’s
trek. Basically you have to decide whether the
risk of wet clothes, or worse, is a less
desirable consequence than the longer hike.
Can you quantify this? Perhaps not with the
precision with which we were able to assess
monetary values in the previous case, but
there is nothing to stop you making
qualitative judgements in the same way.

282 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

Depending on other relevant factors – the
weather, the terrain, how tired you feel, the
distance remaining and so on – you might
decide that an 80  : 20 chance of getting wet
outweighed the certainty of having to trek
eight extra and unnecessary kilometres.
But next imagine a similar situation, only
this time you are practically certain you can
jump the gap. The difference is that this time
the river is a raging torrent and there is a large
waterfall just below the crossing point. Falling
in would carry a serious risk of fatality. In
both cases there is a long walk at stake if you
decide not to jump. But in the first case the
probability of failure is high and the
seriousness of a bad outcome low; in the new
one the risk is very low and the seriousness of
a bad outcome very high. What is the right
decision now?
How a real person would decide would
depend to a degree on temperament. Some
people are natural risk-takers and even
thrive on adrenalin; others are naturally
cautious. But we are not talking here about
feelings or personalities, but about rational
choices. Most people would say it was
perfectly rational to avoid a long trek at even
a high risk of falling into a slow-moving
river, but irrational to take even a tiny risk
when the consequence of failure could be
death. We cannot put fixed numerical values
on the seriousness of the chance of death
compared with the annoyance of wet
clothes, but we can say with justification
that a small risk of death outweighs a big
risk of wet clothes. Although the actual
values, and the ways of expressing them, may
differ, the underlying principle of measuring
seriousness against likelihood is broadly
unchanged. To summarise:
1 Consider the available options.
2 For each option consider the
consequences – the pluses and the
minuses.
3 For each consequence think ‘likelihood
versus seriousness’.

Decision trees
Mathematically, consequences can be
measured by multiplying the value
(importance) of a particular outcome by its
probability. (This is basically what we did in
the simple case of buying a car.) If all the
possible outcomes of a given decision are
added up, that gives us an idea of its overall
desirability, which can be compared with
that of the other available choices,
calculated in the same way. A formal,
graphical representation of this can be made
by means of a decision tree diagram, like
those used in problem solving
(see Chapter 6.3).
Tree diagrams are used in a range of
real-life situations where decisions are
influenced by factual data or evidence. We
find examples in business, politics,
economics, medicine, sport, and many other
widely different disciplines. (Watch a baseball
coach studying pages of percentages before
deciding when or whether to bring on a new
pitcher.) Real-life decisions can be highly
complex. They can also have very important
and far-reaching consequences. If you look
up ‘decision trees’ on the internet, you will
find some bewilderingly complicated
examples. But the underlying principle is
simple, as we have seen.
Here is a fictional, but broadly realistic,
scenario. A small energy company, Zenergies,
has discovered a deep deposit of shale gas,
with unknown commercial potential. The
board have to decide whether to proceed with
extraction of the gas, at a cost of $3 million,
or abandon the project because it may be
unprofitable.
The key factors are the known costs and the
possible returns. The returns, and therefore
the possible profits, depend on the size of the
gas deposit. Although this is unknown,
geologists and market analysts have estimated
that on the lowest estimate the gas would

have a value of $2 million. They call this a
‘Level C’ result. This, of course, would mean a
net loss for the company when the
exploration costs are subtracted, but the
analysts also calculate that the probability of a
Level C result is very low. They set it at 0.1 (or
10%). They also claim that there is a similar
(10%) probability of a large gas deposit – a
‘Level A’ result – with a value as high as
$12 million. The most likely prediction,
however, is somewhere between: a ‘Level B’,
worth around $7 million.
If the company abandons the project and
looks for a safer venture, there is a second
option of putting the extraction rights up for
auction, in the hope that a richer company,
able to take bigger risks, will want to buy
them. Zenergies’ accountants have estimated
that there is a 40% chance of selling the rights
for as much as $5 million, and a 50% chance
of a sale for around $3 million. (That leaves a
slim, 10%, chance that there will be no sale,
or an offer so small that selling is not a viable
option.)

Activity
Discuss what the company should do,
and why.

Commentary and continuation
Statistically there are big gains to be made, but
also significant risks involved. The question is
which is most likely, and by how much. It is
unlikely, though not impossible, that the yield
will be as low as $2 million, with a consequent
loss of $1 million. That is the worst-case
scenario. It is likely to be about $7 million,
with a profit of $4 million; and it may be as
much as $12 million, with a profit of
$9 million. Compared with this there is the
less risky option of selling the rights to extract
the gas.

7.5 Decision making 283

To represent this mathematically we can
construct a tree diagram. We start with what is
known as a decision node, which by
convention is a rectangle, with the choices
branching out from it – hence the name ‘tree’.
At the same time we can write down the
known costs of each of these options next to
the respective branches.

Step 2

Step 1

The next step is to add branches for each of
the possible outcomes. These branch out
from a second type of node, conventionally a
circle, called a chance node. We have data for
three levels of return, depending on the size
of the gas deposit, giving us three levels of
possible return, C, B and A. We can then do
the same for the three possible levels of
return that could come from an auction of
the extraction rights.

Step 3

284 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

Now all that we have to do is insert the
likelihood of each of these outcomes in the
form of a percentage, and to multiply the
estimated value by its probability. (The
probability could be written as a number from
0 to 1, if preferred.) A triangle, or end node, is
placed at the end of each branch with the
product of the calculation beside it. These are
then added together to give the most likely
overall outcome of each decision.

So what does the exercise tell us? It suggests
that going ahead with the project would
probably be more profitable than selling by
about $500,000. This is not very much, in
modern business terms; certainly not enough
to make Zenergies’ decision an easy one. The
board might say that with such small
margins it would be better to take the safer
course of selling, which at least could not
end in a loss. On the other hand it might
argue that since the odds look about equal,
the risk is worth taking. Calculations like
these assist decision making, but they don’t
guarantee success.

Other factors
As observed earlier, real-life decisions generally
involve many more factors than we have
considered in this simplified example. Nor are
direct financial consequences the only factors
which may need to be taken into account.
There may be environmental issues at stake. The
current way in which shale gas is extracted – a
process known as induced hydraulic
fracturing, or ‘fracking’ for short – is believed
by some scientists to increase the risk of
earthquakes. Public opinion, fear of lawsuits,
or even ethical principles may deter Zenergies’
board members from getting involved in shale
gas. Considerations such as these are the
subject of the next chapter.

Summary
• Decision making, on a practical level, can
be assisted by assessing consequences.
• Consequences are measured in terms of:
(1) their seriousness / importance / value /
utility; (2) their likelihood / probability / risk.
Judging the impact of consequences on a
decision means balancing these two factors
against each other.

• Decision trees demonstrate a formal
methodology for decision making.
They work best when the values and
probabilities are quantifiable.

7.5 Decision making 285

End-of-chapter assignment
Suppose a new team of analysts have
reassessed the shale gas deposit in the light
of fresh evidence and improved technology.
The cost of extraction remains the same, but
the team now estimates that there is:
• no danger of a Level C result ($2m return)
• only a 30% probability of a Level B result
($7m return)
• a 40% probability of a Level A result
($12m return)
• a 25% chance of a Level AA result
($24m return)
• a 5% chance of a Level AAA result
($40m return).

286 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

A rival company called Ygen has bid
$10 million for the extraction rights.
Calculate the new probable returns, using
a decision tree if it assists you. Then decide
which of the following can most reliably be
inferred from the data.
A On economic grounds alone Zenergies
should accept Ygen’s bid.
B On economic grounds alone Zenergies
should decline Ygen’s bid and go ahead
with extraction.
C It makes no difference economically
which decision is taken by Zenergies.
Answers and comments are on page 341.

7.6 Principles
One particular type of claim on which
arguments and decisions are often based is an
expression of principle. A principle is a general
claim that, if true, is true under all
circumstances. A principle is not something
that can be applied selectively.

Activity
Read the following dialogue, preferably
aloud with a partner, taking a part each.
Then complete the activity that follows.
Carla:
Can I borrow your new CD?
Dieter: What do you want it for?
Carla:	To make a copy. I’ll give it straight
back.
Dieter: But it’s illegal.
Carla:	So what? No one is going to find
out.
Dieter:	They might. And if they do it’s not
just you that gets in trouble, it’s me
as well.
Carla:	Dieter, am I hearing this? Do you
think the police are going to burst
into your room in the middle of the
night because they suspect you of
lending me a CD? Get real.
Dieter:	I am getting real. I work for a shop
that sells CDs, or had you
forgotten? If I get caught making
pirate copies, I’ll lose my job.
Carla:	But I’ve told you, you won’t get
caught. No one will know.
Dieter: I’ll know.
Carla:	You mean you’ll inform on yourself!

Dieter:	Don’t be silly, Carla. I mean I’ll
know I’ve done something wrong.
I’ll be guilty of cheating.
Carla:
Cheating! Cheating who?
Dieter:	The record company, the songwriters, the band, the retailers . . .
Carla:	Oh, them! Do you know how much
profit they all make out of people
like you and me? If they didn’t
charge so much, we wouldn’t need
to copy CDs. They’re greedy. And if
piracy is denting their profits, good
for piracy! Anyway, it’s not like I’m
walking into a shop and taking
something off the shelf.
Dieter:	It’s still theft. You’re helping
yourself to something without
paying for it. And you are cheating
the owners of the copyright out of
what is theirs. If it’s all right for you
to take from them, you can’t
complain if someone takes
something of yours. Remember
how you felt when your mobile
phone was stolen. Are you now
saying that was all right?
Carla:	That was different. You know it
was. It cost a lot of money to
replace. If I copy your CD, some
fat-cat bosses are going to lose a
fraction of a cent that they won’t
even miss.
Dieter:	Well, then, where do you draw the
line? One cent? Twenty? A dollar? If
it’s OK to take a small amount, it’s
OK to take a little bit more. Then a

7.6 Principles 287

little bit more, and a little bit more
still . . . In the end you’ll be saying
it’s OK to walk into a shop and fill
your pockets with anything that
takes your fancy – as long as no
one finds out.
Carla:	That’s shoplifting. And if you really
think it’s the same as copying one
little CD you’ve got some very
mixed-up ideas.
Dieter:	I’ve got mixed-up ideas?! You’re the
one –
Carla:	Oh, I’m not listening to any more of
your self-righteous rubbish. Keep
your CD. I’ll borrow one from
someone else.
Compare Carla’s argument with Dieter’s.
How would you describe their different
standpoints, and the kind of reasons they
offer to support their positions? Do you
think there is a winner in this argument, and
if so who?

Commentary
The main difference is that Dieter’s is an
argument from principle. At least, it becomes an
argument from principle as a result of Carla’s
persistence. At first Dieter simply resists
lending the CD on the grounds that it is illegal
to make pirate copies and you can get into
trouble for it. When Carla points out that there
is no risk of being found out, Dieter changes
his direction and argues that it is wrong to do
it – on principle. He claims that pirating CDs is
cheating, and really just the same as any other
kind of theft: it makes no difference what the
amounts are or who the loser is. Stealing is
stealing, whether you take a fraction of a cent
from the profits of a huge corporation, or take
goods from a shop, or steal someone’s mobile
phone when they are not looking.

288 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

Carla’s argument invokes no such principle.
She clearly believes that there is a significant
difference between copying a CD and
committing a serious theft. She even implies
that because of the very small loss involved,
and the very large incomes of those who incur
the loss, that there is some justice served by
pirating CDs. It is not that she thinks stealing
is all right: she thinks copying a CD is not the
same as stealing.
Who you pick as the winner depends on
whether you agree with Dieter that this issue is
wholly a matter of principle. If it is, then
Carla’s argument cannot stand up to it: clearly,
the pirating of a CD is a form of theft, and
Carla is wrong to do it, however negligible the
sums are. That is what distinguishes a
principle from other kinds of claim. You can’t
wriggle out of a principle by saying that it
applies under one set of circumstances and not
under others, especially if the ‘other’
circumstances are ones that happen to suit
you. So, if you agree with Dieter that this is a
question of principle, you would really have to
say that he wins the argument. If, however,
you think that the principle doesn’t stretch to
‘harmless’ actions like copying a CD, then
possibly you would say that Carla’s argument
shows more sense of proportion, and that
Dieter’s is too extreme and inflexible.
The point to remember, however, is that
arguments from principle are inflexible. If
something really is a principle, then there are
no exceptions. You could not have it as a
principle that stealing is ‘all right sometimes’,
and that people have to decide when it is and
when it isn’t all right. You might agree with
Carla that it is not the biggest crime in the world
to cheat the music industry out of a few cents,
but you couldn’t defend it on principle. In fact,
if you accept that cheating is wrong, and that
what you have done is cheating, then you also
have to accept that you are in the wrong – even
if you think it is a very minor offence.

So how might Carla defend her position?
One of her lines of argument is to claim that
the companies who make and sell CDs charge
an unjustly high price, which to some extent
justifies cheating them. This is, in fact, quite a
common argument that people bring against
big and powerful organisations. It implies that
overcharging is itself a form of theft; or if not
theft, then at least an abuse of position. As
Carla says:
‘Do you know how much profit they all make
out of people like you and me? If they didn’t
charge so much, we wouldn’t need to copy
CDs. They’re greedy. And if piracy is denting
their profits, good for piracy!’

‘Two wrongs don’t make a right’
The trouble with this argument is that it
infringes another principle that many people
rightly stand by: the principle that two wrongs
don’t make a right. Basically this means that if
someone takes advantage of you, it doesn’t
make it right for you to behave in the same
way. Of course, we all know of occasions when
it seems quite appropriate to say that so-andso ‘asked for it’, or ‘deserved it’, or ‘had it
coming to him’. Suppose a politician has come
to power by spreading malicious lies about her
opponents, only to meet her downfall because
someone has finally done the same thing to
her. You might say with good reason that she
‘deserved’ the shame and humiliation it
caused her. But that would not make it right to
publicly tell lies about her.
Spreading a malicious lie is wrong,
whichever way you look at it. It is harmful; it
is untruthful; and (since it is malicious) it is
obviously done with intent to do harm. No
matter how ‘deserved’ it may be, it remains a
bad thing to do. In fact, by saying that it is
‘deserved’, you have already made the
judgement that the original act was bad. So
you can’t have it both ways: it can’t be a bad
thing when one person does it and a good
thing when another person does it – whatever

the reason. That is what it means to say: ‘Two
wrongs don’t make a right.’
If you accept the principle that two wrongs
don’t make a right, you can’t really accept
Carla’s defence that the big music companies
have ‘asked for it’ by charging inflated prices.
You can sympathise with people who feel that
they are being overcharged. But you can’t
rationally argue that therefore cheating is good
behaviour.

Differences of degree and
differences of kind
There is another line of reasoning used by
Carla that we need to consider. Straight after
her attack on the music industry she says:
‘Anyway, it’s not like I’m walking into a shop
and taking something off the shelf.’ To which
Dieter replies: ‘It’s still theft. You’re helping
yourself to something without paying for it.
And you are cheating the owners of the
copyright out of what is theirs.’

Activity
Carefully consider or discuss the question of
whether it is still theft. Is there a difference
between shoplifting or stealing someone’s
phone, for example, and infringing the
copyright law in the way Carla intends to?
And if so, what is the difference?

Commentary
The difference, according to Dieter, is one of
degree. According to Carla it is a difference in
kind. If these expressions are not familiar to
you, their meaning should soon become clear.
A difference in degree is just a difference
that can be measured or counted: for example,
degrees of temperature, or degrees of strength,
or of intelligence, or of wealth. The list could
go on and on. If we ask two people what their
earnings are, and find that one receives just a
little more than the other, we would call the

7.6 Principles 289

difference one of degree, not one of kind. If we
ask the same two people what they do for a
living, and one says he is a doctor, the other
says a farmer, that is a difference in kind. There
aren’t degrees of being a farmer: you either are
one or you aren’t.
Here is another example. The capital of
Canada is situated on the Ottawa river, which
not only divides the city in two, but also forms
the border between the English-speaking
province of Ontario and the French-speaking
province of Quebec. Judged on the basis of
where you live, you are either an Ontarian or a
Quebecer. You are not more of an Ontarian if
you live three kilometres from the river than
you are if you live one kilometre from the
river. In other words, the difference is of kind,
not degree. The river draws a line between the
two residential areas, and you live in either
one or the other.
If we apply this distinction to Dieter’s
argument we see that he thinks the difference
between copying a CD and stealing goods
from a shop is just a matter of degree. In
effect he says there is no difference, other
than the amount that is taken. Petty cheating
is the same as stealing – in principle. And on
principle it is dishonest to do either.
Carla, by contrast, sees a difference in kind.
She fails to come up with any sort of definition
that shows how they are different, but she
clearly assumes that they are. Comparing the
copying of a CD with the theft of her mobile
phone, she says: ‘That was different. You know
it was. It cost a lot of money to replace.’ And
comparing it with shoplifting: ‘If you really
think it’s the same as copying one little CD
you’ve got some very mixed-up ideas.’

Drawing the line
Dieter’s response is a rhetorical question:
‘Where do you draw the line? One cent?
Twenty? A dollar? If it’s OK to take a small
amount, it’s OK to take a little bit more. Then a
little bit more, and a little bit more still . . . In
the end you’ll be saying it’s OK to walk into a

290 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

shop and fill your pockets with anything that
takes your fancy – as long as no one finds out.’
In other words, Dieter sees no difference in
principle between the two ends of the scale,
because there is no point at which you can
draw a line and say, ‘This is where petty
cheating ends and where real, grown-up
stealing begins.’
Who is right? In the strict sense Dieter
seems to have a better case. If all that Carla can
say is that her mobile phone cost much more
than the small amounts she is going to take
from the music corporations, and that they
can afford it much more than she can, then it
looks like a difference of degree and not of
kind. And therefore the principle applies. But
it is not always as simple as that.
Consider, for example, degrees of wealth.
Although there is only a difference of degree
between one person’s income and another, no
one would say that there is therefore no
difference between wealth and poverty. Just
because we cannot say exactly where one ends
and the other begins, it doesn’t mean that the
adjectives ‘wealthy’ and ‘poor’ do not signify
differences in kind. Similarly, if an employee
takes a paperclip home from work, surely she
is a different kind of offender from someone
who systematically swindles the company out
of millions. Even if our principled friend
Dieter would say that they are both taking
something that isn’t theirs, and are therefore
both thieves, no rational person would say
that they were in the same league.
And so Carla has a point. Sometimes
differences in degree are large enough to
become differences in kind. The truth is that
we can distinguish between minor offences
and serious crimes, just as we can distinguish
between the wealthy and the poor. Dieter is
right to say that they do differ in degree, but
wrong to argue that we can’t tell the difference.

The slippery slope
Dieter’s argument in fact contains quite a
well-known flaw: a version of what is called

‘slippery slope’ reasoning, which we met in
Chapter 4.9. The underlying assumption in a
slippery slope argument is that if you accept
one conclusion you have to accept another
conclusion that is only a little bit different,
and so on. But if you do that you eventually
have to accept some completely outrageous
conclusion. For example, if you tell me that
putting one grain of sugar in my tea won’t
make it taste noticeably sweeter than it did
with no sugar at all, I would have to agree
with you. I would also have to agree that
putting two grains of sugar in the tea wouldn’t
make it taste sweeter than one grain did, and
so on. I would even agree that there will not
be a single point at which the tea tastes
noticeably sweeter than the moment before.
The ‘logical’ conclusion would seem to be that
the tea will never taste noticeably sweeter,
however much sugar I put in. This is
obviously untrue, which means that a string
of evidently true premises have led to a false
conclusion! This shows that the argument is
unsound.
Dieter does something similar by saying
that if you accept the premise that a very
small-scale offence is fairly harmless, then we
have to accept that a slightly more serious one
is also fairly harmless, and so on until we end
up being stuck with the conclusion that any
offence, however serious, is harmless. Stealing
a paperclip is not significantly different from a
massive fraud!
Note: logically, of course, there is no
absolute difference. This creates a puzzle, or
paradox, which has been discussed by thinkers
since ancient times. It is known as the sorites
paradox, after the Greek word for a heap or
pile. If one or two grains of sand don’t make a
heap, adding one more won’t make a heap. So
when does any number of grains of sand
become a heap? In reverse, if a man loses one
hair from his head he is not instantly bald.
How many hairs must he lose before the
description is accurate?

Principles vs pragmatics
A more general way of criticising Dieter’s
reasoning would be to say that he pushes
principle too far. He may have right on his
side, strictly speaking, but his use of the
principle is too heavy-handed. There are
further arguments he could have used which
might have been more appropriate, and which
would have left him looking less ‘selfrighteous’, as Carla calls him when she runs
out of more reasoned arguments.
For example, he could have developed the
argument that copyright infringement is
against the law for good reasons, even if it is
not taken as seriously, by most people, as
directly stealing goods. If copyright isn’t
respected, the best singers and songwriters
may not find it worthwhile producing records,
causing the general quality of musical output
to fall. Alternatively, the recording companies
may respond by charging even more for their
products to cover the costs of fighting lawsuits
or researching ways to beat the pirates. Then,
the argument would go, everyone suffers
because of those who cheat; or, conversely, if
people respect the law, everyone gains in the
long run. This is similar to the argument
against fare-dodgers on public transport, or
people who make false insurance claims. It is
the law-abiding passengers and policy holders
who pay in the end, through higher fares and
premiums, not the transport companies or big
insurers whom the cheats think they have
beaten.
Reasons like these are pragmatic, meaning
practical or sensible, or leading to a desirable
outcome.

Ethical arguments
The issues involved here belong to the subject
of ethics. Dieter’s argument is an ethical, or
moral argument. Ethics is a big subject, and
this book is not the place to discuss it in detail.
However, there are a few quite basic principles
which are relevant to critical thinking, and

7.6 Principles 291

useful to be aware of, and which are included
in some syllabuses.

Activity
Consider the following two lines of argument:
[1] Laws protecting copyright should be
respected because it is in everyone’s
best interest to do so. We all benefit
as a result.
[2] Laws protecting copyright should be
respected because copyright protects
intellectual property, and we are
under a moral obligation not to
steal anyone’s rightful property.
 ow do these two arguments, for the same
H
conclusion, differ?

Commentary
The first argument gives a pragmatic reason for
respecting copyright. It is that we all benefit as a
result. The benefits are not listed, but the
argument could be reinforced by citing some.
For example, the artists get paid in full; the
companies make more profits and – if they are
ethical too – they pass these on to the consumer
in cheaper prices; and so on. If there were not
these benefits, or others like them, argument
[1] would be empty. Its success depends on
there being better consequences when
copyright is respected than when it is ignored.
The second argument cuts straight to the
principle without considering consequences:
we simply have a duty, or obligation, to respect
copyright and not to help ourselves to
something that is not ours, without payment
in return. Even if there were no benefits, this
would be the right thing to do. Stealing is
wrong in whatever form it takes. This,
effectively, is Dieter’s argument.
There are two rather grand-sounding terms
which distinguish these two forms of argument:
[1]
[2]

takes a consequentialist approach
takes a deontological approach.

292 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

The first of these is self-explanatory. If the
consequences of some act are beneficial, then we
say it is a good thing to do. Conversely things
which have unwanted consequences are bad.
But this raises an awkward question: whose
benefit are we talking about? Generally some
people benefit more than others from certain
actions; some may lose altogether. Habitually
selfish people will do what benefits them, or
benefits those they want to please. But few
people would call that a moral principle. It can
be a moral principle only if it benefits more than
just one person and his or her chosen group. The
net gains, overall, must outweigh the losses.
This is sometimes called the utility
principle, or utilitarianism. Its most famous
exponent was the philosopher Jeremy
Bentham. In its simplest form the principle is
that we should always act in ways which result
in the most happiness and/or least distress for
the maximum number of people. It is clearly a
defensible principle. For a start it is not selfish:
it seeks good outcomes for as many people as
possible. You have seen already how it could
be applied to the copyright question. If you
add up everyone’s benefits, large and small, you
get a better total score if copyright is respected
than if the law is routinely broken. But
utilitarianism in some contexts can be seen to
have worrying side-effects. For example, it
may entail that a small minority, or single
individual, has to suffer disproportionately for
the benefit of the greater majority.
In Chapter 7.4 the utility principle could
have been applied to the debate on excessive
imprisonment: harsh penalties for a minority
arguably make the streets safer for the majority.
So on that score an enlarged prison population
would be morally justified, even if it meant
some people being locked up for longer than
they deserve, or on suspicion rather than
proven guilt. A few pay the price of preventing
the supposedly worse consequences of a crime
wave. Many if not most governments operate
this principle to some degree.

By contrast deontology – or the ethics of
duty – involves judging acts not by their
consequences, but by their own value. There
are certain norms of behaviour which we have
a duty to abide by: not stealing, not killing,
not falsely imprisoning, not lying, and so on.
If it really is right or wrong to do something, it
doesn’t matter what the outcomes are: if they
are right we must do them and if they are
wrong we must not. If Carla could show that
making pirate copies of CDs and DVDs did
actually benefit more people than it harmed,
it could be justified in consequentialist terms.
But a deontologist would argue, as Dieter does,
that it is still wrong. A deontologist might also
argue that imprisoning someone for a day
longer than his or her crime warrants is
wrong, however many crimes it prevents.
The great German philosopher Immanuel
Kant is the name most strongly associated
with this ethical system. He argued that an act
can be justified only if it applies universally. It
cannot be all right to lie occasionally, for a
good cause or to help someone out. You might
do it for such a reason, but it would be wrong
nonetheless. If harming someone is immoral,
it doesn’t suddenly become acceptable if it is
done to save or benefit another. One of Kant’s
most famous maxims was that we must never
use people as a means to an end. Overpunishing offenders cannot be justified on the
grounds that it makes others feel safer.

Considering principles
In your own essays and discussions there are
often opportunities to introduce values and
principles alongside, or as objections to,
practical arguments. Think of the decisionmaking arguments in the previous chapter.
They were almost all economic arguments,
affecting only the financial interests of one
company. No principles were involved other
than the principle that decisions should be
made that give the best chance of a healthy
profit. But there are other issues surrounding
the energy industry which are not purely

profit-oriented. Is it right to plunder yet
another of the Earth’s fossil fuel reserves? Is it
safe to drill down into these deep reservoirs of
gas, with the risk of setting off tremors – even
very minor ones? Should we take such risks?
Will the natural environment suffer in any
way? Is our first obligation to the health of
the planet, or to the world economy, which is
dependent on future energy supplies?
Questions like these, which contain words
such as ‘should’, ‘ought’, ‘right’ or ‘wrong’,
‘obligation’, ‘duty’, ‘must’, are questions of
principle. In almost any extended critical
assignment that you are given, principles and
values will be relevant at some level. The basic
question that you will need to address is
whether the principles involved are important
and powerful enough to override the practical
reasons for or against your conclusion. Make a
point, therefore, of always asking yourself, at
the planning stage of an essay, which principles
are relevant to the question, and include them
in your thinking. It is a dimension of critical
reasoning that is often overlooked by students,
and can cost valuable marks.

Statements of principle
What distinguishes a statement of principle
from other kinds of claim is its generality. It
must apply to more than the single particular
case you are considering in order to count as a
principle. It is not a statement of principle that
it would be wrong for Carla to copy Dieter’s
CD. It is a statement of principle that it is
wrong to steal, which makes it wrong to copy
CDs without permission, which makes it
wrong for Carla to copy Dieter’s CD. The
argument is downwards, from the overriding
principle, to more specific principles, and
eventually to the particular case. If citing a
very general principle as a reason for some
conclusion or decision, you may need to
explain how it applies to the particular case,
for example by explaining the sense in which
infringement of copyright is a form of
stealing.

7.6 Principles 293

Not all principles are ethical principles,
although typically they are. There are legal
principles for example. It is a legal principle, in
most developed countries, that a person is
innocent until proven guilty. However, it is
often argued that many or most legal principles
are themselves derived from ethical principles.
There are natural scientific principles, too,
which have nothing to do with right and
wrong. Sometimes they are called ‘laws’, as in
the laws of nature or of physics. The old saying
‘What goes up must come down’ is a law of
nature or scientific principle, now more
generally explained by the law (principle) of
universal gravity. There are even logical
principles. You met the paramount one in
Chapter 7.2: the rule that, to be valid, an
argument must never have true premises and a
false conclusion.

Arguing from principle
The general nature of a principle makes it a
powerful premise in an argument. If one
accepts the truth of a statement of principle,
then it applies to any particular case which
falls under it. When evaluating an argument
from principle the two questions are:
1 Does the principle really hold for every
case?
2 Is the case in question really an example
of the principle?

294 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

Summary
• A principle is a general claim that, if true,
is true under all circumstances.
• Principles, especially those that are
generally accepted, make strong premises.
However, if principles are stretched too far,
the effect can be to weaken the argument.
• Principles are especially relevant in ethical
arguments. There are two broad types of
ethical arguments: those that centre on
the consequences, and those that do not.

End-of-chapter assignment
Find or construct an argument that has a
principle for its main premise. Consider
some of the counter-arguments that could
be raised against it.

7.7 An argument under
the microscope

This chapter, and the next and final chapter,
take a slightly different form from previous
ones. They are working chapters, and their
function is to give you the opportunity to
bring together the skills and understanding
that you have gathered from the earlier ones.
On the next page is a piece of journalistic
text. It addresses an issue that raises its ugly
head every four years, and which has done so
for over a century. The article asks what the
fuss is all about, and offers a no-nonsense
solution.

Activity
This first activity consists of five questions
focusing on analysis of the argument.
Suggested answers are then given in the
commentary that follows. You can look at the
answers after each question; or, if you prefer,
treat the whole activity as a structured
exercise and consult the commentary
afterwards.
1 What is the overall conclusion of the
argument?
2 Reread the first paragraph. How would you
describe its style, or tone, and how does
the author achieve it? What effect does
the first paragraph have, and how might it
influence the reader?
3 The author offers various reasons for
choosing a permanent site in Greece.
Identify:
a a pragmatic reason
b a principle.

4 In paragraph 2 the author makes the
explicit assumption that money and
national pride should have nothing to
do with the debate. What implicit (i.e.
unstated) assumption does she also
make – and is it warranted?
5 What is the function of paragraph 3?

Commentary
This commentary is in the form of specimen
answers to each of the five questions. Compare
them with your own answers, and revise yours
if you find you need to.
1 The conclusion comes at the end of the
second paragraph. It is the whole of the
sentence: ‘There is only one sensible and
justifiable place to have the Games, and
that is Athens, the capital of Greece –
this time, next time and always.’
If you choose (or you are asked) to
paraphrase your answer, rather than
lifting it word-for-word from the text,
remember that you must still give the
conclusion in full. This is not a simple,
one-part claim: there are several elements
to it. It is not enough to say that the
Games should be in Athens. The actual
conclusion is that there is only one
‘sensible’ and ‘justifiable’ location for the
Games, and that Athens should become
the permanent site.
The need to capture the whole of the
conclusion becomes clear when you move
on to evaluating the supporting

7.7 An argument under the microscope 295

DOC 1

WHOSE ARE THE OLYMPICS
ANYWAY?
It’s that time again when
everyone starts running and
jumping with excitement over
the Olympic Games. I don’t
mean running and jumping on
the athletics track, either. This is
not sports fever, it’s politics. Nor
is the excitement about the next
Olympics, but the one after the
one after next. Yes, it’s that time
when the International Olympic
Committee (IOC) decides which
city will stage the world’s
biggest sporting extravaganza
eight years from now.
So why all the fuss? One
simple answer – money.
National pride may have
something to do with it, too; but
money is the real driving force.
However, the truth is that
neither money nor national
pride should play any part in
the debate. The Olympic
Games rightfully belong in one
country, Greece, for the very
good reason that Greece is
where the Olympic Games were
invented and where the name
comes from. This is not a
political or an economic issue.
There is only one sensible and
justifiable place to have the
Games, and that is Athens, the
capital of Greece – this time,
next time and always.
Of course some of the
competing nations will ask why

all the benefits of holding the
Olympics, especially the huge
revenue that they allegedly
generate, should always go to
one country. Alternatively, it is
often pointed out that hosting
the Olympics is a risky
business, requiring massive
investment to make it a
success. A country the size of
Greece cannot be expected to
bear those costs every four
years. Sharing the burdens, as
well as the benefits of the
Games, is the fair and proper
way to do it, with the richer
countries being the safest
choice.
But these self-seeking and
contradictory arguments are
precisely what you would expect
to hear from big business. Of
course those with most to gain
from the building programmes
needed to provide the facilities
and infrastructures will say that
the present system is the most
workable. It is a view that gets
much of its support from North
America and Western Europe,
which have had more than their
fair share of playing host to the
Games. The economic case for
retaining the existing
arrangement is therefore flawed
from the start.
The Olympic Games, properly
understood, are an international

296 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

movement dedicated to
friendship and peace worldwide.
The Games are no nation’s
property. The countries that take
part should pay for the Games
according to their wealth, with
the poorest nations contributing
least and benefiting most. That
approach alone would reflect
the true Olympic ideal. But it is
only possible if the Games have
a permanent site.
Last but not least, there is a
practical but compelling reason
for returning the Olympic
Games to their ancient roots,
and that is the ever-present
threat of terrorism. Everyone
who is old enough remembers
the tragic events that marred
the 20th (Munich) Olympiad in
1972. Today the Games are an
obvious target for an atrocity
that would put 1972 in the
shade, especially if the games
are seen, rightly or wrongly, as
a symbol of US world
dominance. By holding the
Games in the historical
location, rather than a different
national capital every four
years, the issue becomes
depoliticised, and the danger
of a terrorist attack is greatly
reduced.
Janet Sender

argument. If the reasons supported only
the claim that it was justifiable, without
saying why it was also sensible, the
argument would be unsound, because it
would be incomplete. Similarly, if the
argument didn’t establish that one
permanent site was more justifiable and
sensible than a different site each time,
again the reasoning would be inadequate.
‘Athens should be the site of the next
Olympic Games’ would not be a
sufficiently accurate and inclusive answer.
‘The Greek capital should be the
permanent home of the Olympic Games;
no other solution can be justified or
makes sense’ would be fine.
2 The first paragraph is introductory. It
sets up the context for the argument
as a whole without giving either the
conclusion or any supporting reasons.
You could describe the author’s style of
writing in the first paragraph in a number
of ways: for example, humorous, sarcastic,
scornful, dismissive, pejorative. It is
achieved by means of phrases like:
‘running and jumping . . . (not) on the
athletics track’, which makes the
excitement she is talking about seem
childish; and the word ‘extravaganza’,
which suggests that the current Olympic
Games are over-glamorised. Janet Sender
is probably trying to make the reader feel
that the ‘fuss’ over the hosting of the
Games is all a bit unnecessary, and a bit
ridiculous. If it works, this can have the
effect of ‘softening the reader up’ for the
reasoned argument that is to come. In
other words it is a rhetorical device, rather
than straightforward reasoning.
When you are evaluating an argument
it is important to look out for features of
persuasive writing and distinguish
between them and the reasoning itself.
By the ‘reasoning itself’, we mean the
underlying claims, which could be
expressed in any number of different

ways. By the writing ‘style’, we mean the
claims as they are expressed in a particular
piece of text, complete with any
emotional appeals, sarcastic touches,
colourful phrases and so on. In paragraph
1 there are plenty; so it is more than just
an introduction.
3 a	One pragmatic reason the author
offers is that a permanent site
will, arguably, reduce the threat of
terrorism by depoliticising the Games.
This would obviously be of practical
benefit to athletes and spectators, and
even to the organisers whose profits
would be affected if the threat of a
terrorist attack deterred people from
attending the Games. The inclusion of
the word ‘practical’ in the text marks
this as a pragmatic reason.
b By contrast there is no obvious
practical benefit behind the argument
that Greece is where the Games were
invented and where the name comes
from. We are told that the Games are
‘rightfully’ the property of Greece
for these historical reasons, and for
that reason alone they should be
held there. The general principle
underlying this strand of reasoning
is that the inventor or originator of
something has a moral and/or legal
ownership of it. This applies not
just to this particular context, but to
authors, artists, explorers and others –
in fact any person or group who can
claim to have discovered, created or
invented something.
4 There is clearly an assumption in
paragraph 2 that historical reasons
should play a part in the debate. Without
this assumption the conclusion just
doesn’t follow. Another way to say this
is that there is a missing premise. If the
author wanted to spell this premise out
it would have to be something like: ‘The
issue is a historical one.’ Merely saying

7.7 An argument under the microscope  297

that it is not political or economic does
not establish that it is historical.
5 Paragraph 3 is a counter-argument.
You may remember from Unit 4.8 that
the strategy of anticipating a counterargument – i.e. setting it up and then
knocking it down – is a common
argument strategy. That is clearly what
the author is doing here.

Activity
The next five questions are evaluative. Again
there are suggested answers in the
commentary that follows.
6 Is the charge of being ‘contradictory’
(paragraph 4) a fair assessment of the
counter-argument?
7 Paragraph 4 is a response to the
counter-argument (a counter-counterargument). What is your evaluation of it?
8 In paragraph 5, the author writes: ‘The
Games are no nation’s property.’ Is this
claim contradicted elsewhere in the
passage? If so, does the contradiction
weaken the argument to any extent?
9 Bearing in mind exactly what the
conclusion of the argument is, does the
argument adequately support it?
10 ‘The ancient Olympic Games were for
competitors from all over Greece. The
modern Olympics are for competitors
from all over the world.’ If true, what
impact does this observation have on
the argument?

Commentary
6 You can see what the author means
when she brands the counter-argument
‘contradictory’. The way she has set up
the counter-argument, it looks as if those
who support it want it both ways: they
want to say no one country should get
the profits, and that no one country

298 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

should have to bear the costs. But you
could equally say that the counterargument is simply looking at two
possible outcomes, and claiming that
either way it would be unfair. Thus the
charge of contradiction does not really
stick.
7 Paragraph 4 is a very weak response. In
fact it is an example of a classic fallacy,
known as an ad hominem argument,
which was introduced in Chapter 4.9.
Argumentum ad hominem means the
argument is directed at the person who
holds the belief or makes the claim,
rather than at the argument itself. It
may be perfectly true that the economic
argument for the present system does
suit big business, and that it finds favour
in North America in particular. But that
does not make the argument bad; and it
certainly doesn’t make it flawed, as the
author concludes. The flaw is much more
evident in the author’s argument than in
the counter-argument she unsuccessfully
tries to demolish.
8 This is a tricky question because it
appears to have a very straightforward
answer. In paragraph 2 the author says,
quite plainly, that the Olympic Games
‘rightfully belong in one country,
Greece’. This looks like a blatant
contradiction of the later statement
that they are the property of no one
nation. And if it is a clear contradiction,
it also appears to be a serious flaw in
the reasoning. For surely, if the Games
do belong to no single nation, then
the present system of rotating the host
country would seem the right one, and
giving it permanently to Greece, as the
author proposes, would seem to fly in the
face of one of her premises.
But is it as blatant a contradiction as it
seems? Not necessarily. You could defend
the argument by clarifying what exactly is
meant by the words ‘belong’ and

‘property’. ‘Property’ suggests ownership
or possession. If the Games were the
out-and-out property of one country, that
country would presumably have the right
to do as it pleased with them for its own
benefit – choose the time and place, make
the rules, keep all the profits. But the
author is not saying anything as extreme
as that. Just belonging somewhere is not
the same as being a possession, especially
when followed by the word ‘in’ rather
than ‘to’. This may seem a small detail,
but accurate analysis often depends on
small detail: a word here, a phrase there. It
might be perfectly reasonable to say that
the Olympic Games belong in Greece, but
that they are not the property of Greece.
In other words the Olympics remain the
property of all the nations that compete
in them, but historically their rightful
location is Greece. It could even be
pointed out that ‘Greece’ means a region
of the world where the ancient Olympics
took place, not the modern country
called Greece; and that is all that it means
to say the Games belong there. Under that
interpretation there is no contradiction.
Of course, an opponent of the argument
could just as reasonably reply that this is a
quibble: ‘belonging in’, ‘belonging to’,
‘property of’ all mean the same when it
comes to deciding whether the Games
should be in one country or shared
around. The author cannot have it both
ways. If the Games don’t belong to
Greece, they don’t belong in Greece
either, and that is all there is to it.
Which of these is the right interpretation
is ultimately for you to decide. In doing
so, remember the principle of charity
(Chapter 2.7, page 52). The way to apply
it is to ask: Would the author have made
these two statements if she thought they
contradicted each other? The answer is,
almost certainly, no. Why would she? She
doesn’t need to say that the Olympic

Games belong to Greece in the sense of
being Greece’s property. It is quite
sufficient for her argument to say that the
Olympic Games belong in their
traditional location. And she has no need
to deny that they also belong to the whole
world, and should be governed by the
International Olympic Committee as
they are now. You would only insist on
the worst interpretation if you wanted to
find fault with the argument, which is a
form of prejudgement. Under the
principle of charity you assume the best
interpretation; then if you still want to
make negative criticisms, or present
counter-arguments, they will be fair
comment. Another way to put all this
would be to say that accusing the author
of a contradiction in this context would
be a rather cheap objection. It would be
like picking someone up for a slip of the
tongue, or for saying something that they
never really meant. In this respect it has
some resemblance to the ‘straw man’
argument that you saw in Chapter 4.9.
9 No, the argument does not adequately
support the conclusion. The conclusion
is a very strongly worded claim that the
only sensible and justifiable place for
the Games is Athens – now and always.
Words like ‘only’ and ‘always’ require
equally strong premises to underpin
them. The weakness of the author’s
argument is that she has not eliminated
all the possible alternatives, or looked at
all the possible counter-arguments. She
could reasonably conclude that there
is some justification for a permanent
site in Athens, and that it makes
good sense. For that she has provided
some support. She has not come near
to establishing that this is the only
acceptable conclusion. You could say
that this imbalance between reasons and
conclusion amounts to flawed reasoning.
Alternatively, you could describe it as a

7.7 An argument under the microscope  299

serious weakness. Either way, the right
evaluation of the argument is that it falls
short of its purpose.
10 T
 he observation may be considered
fairly damaging. The historical
argument is an important part of the
author’s case: she is using the fact that
the Games were originally in Greece to
support the conclusion that they should
always be in Greece. If someone objects
that the original Games were located in
the region from which all the athletes
came, and that this is no longer the
case, that would be grounds for arguing
that circumstances have significantly
changed. However, the objection is not
a fatal one. There are still defences that
could be made: for example, the age of
air travel has made the world a much
smaller place. It probably takes less
time to fly from Sydney to Athens than
it took to travel from Sparta to Athens
in ancient times. Therefore the place
where the athletes come from is not
really relevant to the case for a single
permanent site.

Critical questions
Questions like the ones you have been
answering provide a useful way of focusing on
the key features of an argument, which is why
such questions are included in thinking skills
examination papers. The questions were quite
tough, and required some serious critical

300 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

thinking on your part. But they are also a bit
of a luxury because they guide you in your
analysis and evaluation. When you are
confronted with real arguments – on
television, in print, or just conversation – you
have to know what questions to ask, as well as
how to answer them.
Many of the questions above are worth
remembering because they, or questions very
like them, will be relevant to most arguments,
not just to this one. You will almost always
need to ask questions such as: What is the
main conclusion? Are there any missing
premises (assumptions)? Are there
contradictions? Are the reasons strong enough
to support the conclusion? What use does the
author make of persuasive language, emotion,
or popular appeal?

End-of-chapter assignment
Find an argument in a recent newspaper, or
on the internet, and make a copy of it. Using
some or all of the questions you were asked
in this chapter, produce a list of questions
based on the text you have chosen.
You can then either answer the questions
yourself or exchange texts with a fellow
student and answer each other’s.

7.8 Critical writing
In the previous chapter you studied a single
document and answered some specific
questions on it. These tested your skills in
analysis and evaluation.
In this unit we introduce a further skill that
you need to develop for more advanced levels
of critical thinking. It is the skill of bringing
together information, evidence and opinion
from a range of different sources to support an
argument or conclusion. This is known as
synthesis. In higher-level thinking skills
examinations it is assessed by means of an
extended piece of writing that you have to
plan and construct yourself.
Synthesis requires first selecting and
organising material that is relevant to a
particular task. In the activity that follows, the
task is to extend the debate on the Olympic
Games that arises from Janet Sender’s article
on page 296 (Doc 1). The questions she was
addressing were fairly narrow ones: ‘Whose are
the Olympics?’ and ‘Where should the

Olympics take place?’ Her conclusion was that
they should be held permanently in Athens,
and her reasoning was largely historical and
political. Among its weaknesses was the fact
that she gave little in the way of factual
information, examples or evidence to support
her claims.
The three new documents that follow are
largely informative. Not every part of them is
directly relevant to the debate, and there is
more information in them than you would
need for an argument on the specific question
of where the Olympic Games should be held.
Nor do the additional documents enter directly
into the debate, although they contribute to it.
Read the new documents now, and if
necessary reread Janet Sender’s argument too.
Do this quickly, to get an overview of the
material, rather than trying to take in every
detail. Look out for the parts of the texts that
are most relevant to the debate. Then move on
to the activity that follows.

7.8 Critical writing 301

DOC 2

The history of the Olympic Games – ancient and modern
Introduction
The modern Olympic Games are always hosted by a city – not by a country. The first Olympic Games of the
Modern Era were hosted by Athens (Greece). The Olympic Games were hosted by Beijing (China) in 2008
and by London (UK) in 2012.

Host cities and the calendar known as the Olympiad
The ancient Olympic Games were always in the same place – Olympia – a sacred city in western Greece
known as Elis. The Games were a religious event, a festival that honored the Greek God Zeus. The ancient
Games were hosted by the Elians who were the guardians of the sanctuary to Zeus. They tried – and
succeeded for a few hundred years – to be neutral, that is, unallied to other Greek city-states, similar to
modern-day Switzerland. But in the fifth century BCE (or BC) they allied themselves with Sparta and warred
against their neighbors. The Elians lost control of the sanctuary to the Spartans, then to other Greek
city-states, then finally to the conquering Romans. In 80 BCE the Roman general Sulla moved the Olympic
Games to Rome and only a single race for boys was held at Olympia, the stade race. But then Sulla died
and the next Games returned to Olympia in 76 BCE.
The ancient Olympic Games and the modern Olympic Games are quadrennial, meaning they are held
every four years. This four year period of time is known as an Olympiad. To the ancient Greeks an Olympiad
was their calendar, a way of designating time. However, this calendar was not used by every Greek city-state
and there is great difficulty in studying ancient history because of the calendar and attempts to ‘date’
things. There was no accurate dating system in the ancient era and every civilization used a different
calendar system. There were calendars for the Babylonians, Hebrews, Greeks and many others. The one
thing the civilizations had in common was that they were conquered by the Romans. Julius Caesar created
the Julian calendar in 46 BCE. Our modern calendar, known as the Gregorian calendar, is based upon
revisions to the Julian calendar, made and instituted by the Catholic Church in 1582 by Pope Gregory XIII.
This becomes an issue when trying to date the ancient Greek Olympiads from 776 BCE, which was ‘year
one’ of the first Olympiad.
Just as in ancient Greece, the modern Olympic Games are held every four years at the beginning of the
Olympiad. The First Modern Olympiad began in 1896 when Pierre de Coubertin revived the Olympic Games
and they were held in Athens.
During the early years of the modern Olympic movement there was a disagreement over who should host
the Olympic Games. The Greek government wanted the Games in Athens permanently while Pierre de
Coubertin, the French ‘founder’ of the modern Olympic Games, wanted them to rotate around the world to
major sporting cities. So the Olympic Games of the second Olympiad were held in Paris, France, and the
Games of the third Olympiad were in St Louis, Missouri, USA. The Greeks went ahead and scheduled their
own Olympic Games in 1906, a tenth anniversary celebration of the 1896 Games. At that time these
Games were considered ‘official,’ in spite of the calendar – not being a quadrennial event. From a historical
perspective, the 1906 Olympic Games must always be included in Olympic record-keeping. They happened
– they cannot be ignored. However, they are not called the Games of the fourth Olympiad, because these

302 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

were held in 1908 in London, UK. Is this confusing you? Don’t worry – it was confusing to everyone back
then too. The Greek government did not hold any future Olympic celebrations in the 20th century because
they were too expensive. The modern Games have continued to be hosted in cities around the world. The
Greeks tried to get the 1996 Games because it was the centennial (100th birthday) of the modern Olympic
Games, but the host was Atlanta (USA). However, in 2004 the Games did return to Athens.
The ancient Greeks celebrated their Olympic Games without interruption for over 1000 years, from 776
BCE to 261 CE (AD). Quite remarkable! After the year 261 it is unknown what happened to the Games
because records are lost. Actually, they abruptly end – probably because there was an invasion by the
Heruli, a barbarian tribe from the coast of what is now southern Russia. Invading in a fleet of 500 ships
they devastated Byzantium and Greece before the Romans forced them to retreat. The Elians erected
defensive walls with towers around the Olympic sanctuary, but we have no evidence that any celebrations
were held.
There must have been something still happening at Olympia. It must have remained a religious site to
the Greek god Zeus. We know this because in 391 CE the Roman emperor Theodosius I, who accepted the
new religion known as Christianity, outlawed all pagan religious festivals throughout the Roman Empire. It is
believed that the last Games held at Olympia were in 393 CE. By 395 CE it is known that the great statue
of Zeus, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, had been removed to a Roman palace in
Constantinople, the capital of the Eastern Empire, where it was destroyed in a fire in 462 CE. But evidence
has been found that there were even later Olympic Games until 425 CE. In 426 CE Theodosius II, grandson
of Theodosius I, issued an edict to destroy all pagan temples. The temple of Zeus at Olympia was burned to
the ground. Rome itself had already been sacked by Allaric and the Visigoths in 410 CE. The ‘Dark Ages’
had begun. Keep in mind that all these dates have been calculated by historians who have tried to use
mathematics to ‘date’ events.
Almost 1500 years had passed when Pierre de Coubertin, of France, organized a revival of the ancient
Olympic Games and the first celebration was held in Athens, Greece in 1896. In the first 50 years of the
modern Games they have been cancelled three times. In 1916 the Games were cancelled due to World War
I and in both 1940 and 1944 they were cancelled due to World War II. In 1980 the United States led a
boycott of the Moscow Olympics and in 1984 the Soviets retaliated and led a boycott of the Los Angeles
Olympics. Wars, politics, corruption – these are forces that affect the modern Games as much as they
affected the ancient Games. They influence who is the host of the Games and they impact on the calendar.
Although an Olympiad cannot be cancelled because it is a period of time, the Games of an Olympiad can be
cancelled. Below is a list of the host cities of the modern Olympic Games with Arabic numbers being used
instead of Roman numerals (21st Olympiad instead of XXI Olympiad).

Host cities of the modern Olympic Games
1896

1st Olympiad

Athens, Greece

1900

2nd Olympiad

Paris, France

1904

3rd Olympiad

St Louis, Missouri, USA

7.8 Critical writing 303

1906

3rd Olympiad, year 3

Athens, Greece (sometimes called the ‘interim Games’)

1908

4th Olympiad

London, UK

1912

5th Olympiad

Stockholm, Sweden

1916

6th Olympiad

cancelled because of World War I (scheduled for
Berlin, Germany)

1920

7th Olympiad

Antwerp, Belgium

1924

8th Olympiad

Paris, France

1928

9th Olympiad

Amsterdam, The Netherlands

1932

10th Olympiad

Los Angeles, California, USA

1936

11th Olympiad

Berlin, Germany

1940

12th Olympiad

cancelled because of World War II (scheduled for Tokyo,
Japan; then re-scheduled for Helsinki, Finland and cancelled a
second time)

1944

13th Olympiad

cancelled because of World War II (London considered, but
war continued)

1948

14th Olympiad

London, UK

1952

15th Olympiad

Helsinki, Finland

1956

16th Olympiad

Melbourne, Australia / Stockholm, Sweden (horses were not
permitted to be imported into Australia so the equestrian
events were in Stockholm)

1960

17th Olympiad

Rome, Italy

1964

18th Olympiad

Tokyo, Japan

1968

19th Olympiad

Mexico City, Mexico

1972

20th Olympiad

Munich, Germany

1976

21st Olympiad

Montreal, Canada

1980

22nd Olympiad

Moscow, Soviet Union (USSR)

1984

23rd Olympiad

Los Angeles, California, USA

1988

24th Olympiad

Seoul, South Korea

1992

25th Olympiad

Barcelona, Spain

1996

26th Olympiad

Atlanta, Georgia, USA

2000

27th Olympiad

Sydney, Australia

2004

28th Olympiad

Athens, Greece

2008

29th Olympiad

Beijing, China

2012

30th Olympiad

London, UK

2016

31st Olympiad

Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

304 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

DOC 3

Hello, I found your site very informative. I was wondering if you could tell me how a city is chosen to host
the Olympics? Thanx so much. Sarah, New York
Response: Cities (not countries) are chosen by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) to host the
Olympic Games. There is a formal procedure that must be followed by all the cities desiring to host the
Games. This process is called the ‘bid’. Cities bid to host the Games. Usually a city will form a committee
or a commission to prepare the bid. The bid is like a book that gives details such as sports facilities, hotels
and restaurants available, transport network, and many other aspects of holding such a large function as
the Olympic Games. The bid must answer questions like ‘Where would the 10,000 athletes stay?’ ‘What
sports facilities exist now, and what would have to be built?’ ‘What public transport exists and could it
handle huge crowds for all the sports?’ ‘Who would finance the cost of the Games?’ Hundreds of other
questions need to be answered. The ‘bid book’ is then submitted to the IOC for review. It used to be that
the entire IOC would visit all the cities that submitted bids. Six years prior to the Olympic Games in
question, the IOC schedules a meeting and votes for a host city.
However, a problem has come up in this bid procedure – corruption. Salt Lake City, the host of the Winter
Olympic Games in 2002, apparently earned some votes through bribing members of the IOC. The IOC has
always had a very good reputation for honesty and character, but this reputation was tarnished through the
bribery scandal. The IOC investigated its members and kicked some of them out. Others were warned. Then
they changed their procedure. Now only a small group of the IOC (there are over 100 members) visits each
candidate city, along with selected international experts and athletes, and they report back to the rest of
the membership.
Are the Winter Olympics the same as the Summer Olympics? Christos, Melbourne, Australia
Response: They are in a different time and place. Obviously they have to be somewhere with snow. And
there were no ancient winter Olympics either, because the Greeks hadn’t invented skiing! Otherwise, yes,
the same rules and procedures apply for choosing a venue for the Winter Games.
What do the Olympic rings mean and where did they come from? Ariel, Santiago, Chile
Response: The Olympic rings were designed by Pierre de Coubertin around 1913. Contrary to popular
belief, the Olympic rings never existed in ancient Greece. This myth was created by an error published in a
popular book about the ancient Olympic Games in the 1960s. The authors did not know what they were
looking at and concluded (wrongly) that the Olympic rings were 3000 years old. In Greece, inside the
ancient stadium at Delphi, there was a stone engraved (actually not engraved, but in relief) with the five
Olympic rings. This stone was actually created by German stonemasons in 1936 for Leni Riefenstahl’s film
Olympia. Many authors have perpetuated this myth by including this information in their ancient Olympic
chapters. But it’s wrong! Just goes to show that not all historians know what they are talking about.
The Olympic rings designed by Pierre de Coubertin actually represented the first five Olympic Games
(1896, 1900, 1904, 1908, 1912) when they were first used in 1913. Later they came to represent five
continents. The three rings on the top row are blue, black and red with the two rings in the lower row yellow
and green. When all are connected, the order of colours is: blue, yellow, black, green, red.

7.8 Critical writing 305

DOC 4

THE OLYMPIC CHARTER
Rights over the Olympic Games and Olympic properties
The Olympic Games are the exclusive property of the IOC (International Olympic Committee)
which owns all rights and data relating thereto, in particular, and without limitation, all rights
relating to their organisation, exploitation, broadcasting, recording, representation, reproduction,
access and dissemination in any form and by any means or mechanism whatsoever, whether now
existing or developed in the future.

The IOC
The IOC is an international non-governmental not-for-profit organisation. Members of the IOC
represent and promote the interests of the IOC and of the Olympic Movement in their countries
and in the organisations of the Olympic Movement in which they serve.

Activity
You have been asked to speak in a debate on
the future of the Olympic Games to an
audience of athletes, business people,
sports fans and others who are concerned
that the Games are falling into disrepute and
straying from their original ideals. The
previous speaker in the debate was Janet
Sender: your job is either to support or to
oppose her proposal.
Go through all the items again, including
Janet Sender’s article, and note down, or
highlight, any points that you feel to be
relevant to the argument you will be
constructing. There is no need to sort or
organise it at this stage: just compile a rough
list of points that you could make, and others
that you may need to respond to.

Commentary
Selection
Before you can begin to select and organise
relevant material from sources like these, you
need to be very clear what you are doing it

306 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

for – the task or assignment that has led you
to the documents in the first place.
There are some parts of the texts that are of
obvious significance, and some that are just as
obviously irrelevant. For instance, if you are
going to take up Janet Sender’s argument that
the interests of western Europe and the USA
have been served much better than those of
other nations, especially in the developing
world, the table of host cities would clearly be
useful evidence. Even if you decide to oppose
the previous speaker, you would need to
anticipate the accusation that the West has had
the lion’s share of the Olympic cake. Hence the
data in the table is relevant whether it will
strengthen your conclusion or challenge it.
The list of points you select will usually be a
mixture of fact and opinion, and it is important
not to confuse them. Generally speaking, facts
are neutral, unlike opinions or judgements. A
footprint in the snow is just that, an outline of
a foot, unless or until some significance is
attached to it. If it turns out to have the same
pattern as the boots owned by a defendant in a
murder trial, the footprint becomes a piece of
evidence. Similarly, the fact that the Olympic
Games were held in Atlanta in 1996 is a neutral

fact unless, for instance, it is coupled with the
fact that they had been held in Los Angeles
only 12 years earlier and that both these cities
are in the USA. Something else to remember is
that the same piece of evidence can be a
‘two-edged sword’. It may, depending on how it
is presented and interpreted, give support to
either side in an argument.
Take, for example, the information about
the earliest records of the Games, in the
second paragraph of Doc 2:
T he ancient Olympic Games were always in
the same place – Olympia – a sacred city in
western Greece known as Elis. The Games
were a religious event, a festival that honored
the Greek God Zeus. The ancient Games were
hosted by the Elians who were the guardians
of the sanctuary to Zeus . . .
This could be presented straightforwardly as
support for the claim that the Olympics
belong in Greece on historical and
geographical grounds. This is very much Janet
Sender’s take on the facts. But the few lines of
information could just as well be used to argue
that the ancient Games were nothing like the
modern ones, and the only connection
between them is that they share the same

name. Therefore the event we call the
Olympics now is no more a Greek invention
than it is French or American or Chinese.
At this stage in the exercise you should try,
as far as possible, to keep an open mind, even
if you do sympathise with one side more than
the other. Critical thinking should never be
reduced to a game in which the sole purpose
is to ‘win’ an argument. The primary object
of learning to think critically is to make good
judgements, not to score points. The right
approach is to look at the facts and ask
yourself: ‘What conclusion does this
information most strongly support?’ Not:
‘How can this information be manipulated to
back up my already-formed opinion?’
The points you select from the documents
may be similar to the bullet points below –
though the exact way in which you make
notes is up to you and your tutor to develop.
And if you are writing them in an exam, they
can be even more abbreviated, as only you
need to understand them. All the same, don’t
rush the reading and note-making stages of
the exercise: the time you spend reading,
thinking and planning will save you time
when you come to writing your finished essay.

Doc 1 – argument
• conclusion: should be permanent venue in Greece
• reasons: historical right / present system driven by money / would depoliticise games /
lessen terrorist threat
• evaluation: contradictory in parts

Doc 2 – historical
early OGs held at Olympia – religious festival – hosted by Elians (neutral but later allied and
hostile); moved to Rome in 80 BC, then back
• took place every four years and were like a calendar
• lasted 1000 yrs! then 1500 years passed before games restored
• records, especially dates unreliable / different calendars
• modern games – Coubertin – Frenchman; disagreement and confusion at first
• Games affected by wars, politics and corruption

7.8 Critical writing 307

Data table
shows most Games held in Europe or N. America

Doc 3 – internet discussion site
•
•
•
•

complex bidding system
IOC then decide
open to corruption e.g. Salt Lake City winter games
Olympic rings mean the five continents / designed in modern times

Doc 4 – official statement
Games belong entirely to IOC, a not-for-profit NGO

You may have left out some of these points
and you may have included others. But it is
hoped that your list will have been similar.
Clearly, many of the notes above are relevant
and could be used by one side or the other in
the debate.
Notice how this exercise has condensed
several passages, some of which were quite long,
into a handful of bullet points. You may need to
go back to the documents later to find specific
details, but mostly you can now work from the
notes in planning and writing your speech.

Inference
Once you have selected the relevant points
from the documents, the next task is to decide
what can be inferred from them, both
individually and collectively. You must also
decide what cannot be inferred, so that you do
not jump to conclusions. Take the table of host
cities in Doc 2. As raw data it just tells you each
of the venues of the Summer Olympics in
modern times. But the data supports a number
of quite striking facts. For instance, the
modern Games have never been held in Africa;
and Asia and South America are also clearly
under-represented in the table. You can count
up yourself how many times the Games have
been in Europe.

308 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

Facts like these are simply a matter of data
extraction, which is treated in more detail
and complexity in the problem-solving
sections of this book. If someone had wished
to make the point about the unequal
distribution of the host cities, they could
have presented the data in other ways, e.g.
percentages or pie charts. But here there are
no points being made overtly. The inferences
are left to the reader to draw, and that is what
you must do.
Drawing direct, factual conclusions from
the data is one thing. Making further
inferences and value judgements on the basis
of the data is another, and you must do it with
care. It would be a safe enough observation to
say that the international spirit of the
Olympic Games has not been reflected in the
choice of host cities. It would not be a safe
conclusion to say that there has been
favouritism and corruption in the IOC.
You would need evidence of a different kind
altogether to go that far. The most you could
infer in that direction is that the obvious
imbalance towards certain regions of the
world raises questions about favouritism,
and that this is not good for the reputation
of the Olympic movement, whether it is
founded or not.

Synthesis
We now come to the final and most
demanding part of the exercise: drawing
together the various pieces of information,
inference and opinion to make a cogent
argument for one side or the other. This is the
part we call ‘synthesis’.

Activity
2 Review the points you have listed showing
what you consider the most relevant
items in the documents. (You may want
to add or delete some after comparing
your list with the one suggested above,
but if you are happy with yours, then use
it.) Look in particular for links between
the points, or natural ways to group them.
There are a number of different ways to
do this: highlighting, numbering, drawing
connecting lines, and so on.

Commentary
Not wanting to do the work for you, just one
example of the kind of links that can be made
is shown below. It follows up on the inferences
we drew earlier from the data in Doc 2. Three
points are drawn together as being relevant to
the question of favouritism – or worse – in the
selection process. The student has highlighted
them and made a brief note as to the possible
connection between them: (1) the data adds to
any suspicion there may be about corruption;
and (2) even if there is no corruption there is
something wrong with a movement that
embraces five continents but usually excludes

three of them from the honour of holding the
Games. Developing these themes would
provide a substantial paragraph or section in
the student’s eventual essay.

Decision time:
‘resolving the dilemma’
All worthwhile arguments have two sides to
them. An argument with only one side – or an
argument to which there is no reply – may
exist but is hardly worth making. An argument
for something that is already a known fact
would fall into this category. It is
uninteresting.
Interesting arguments, on the other hand,
present us with dilemmas. A dilemma is a
difficult choice. It is difficult either because
there are good reasons for either side of the
argument; or because, whichever choice you
make, there are some unwanted consequences.
Therefore you will often hear people talk
about the ‘horns’ of a dilemma: if you avoid
one horn, there is another waiting for you!
The choices for the Olympic movement –
and for you now that you are involved in the
debate – are whether it would be better to keep
to the present system of rotating the Games at
different venues, with all the problems and
criticisms that gives rise to; or to opt for one
permanent site and risk angering some
member countries who want their turn to host
the event. The dilemma is that whichever the
IOC decides, it will not please everyone. The
dilemma is compounded by the fact that there
is no third way. This is a case where the
options are restricted to two, so there is no
fallacy in arguing that if one is not chosen,

shows most Games held in Europe or N. America

Doc 3 – internet discussion site

adds

• complex bidding system
to suspicion
• IOC then decide
• open to corruption e.g. Salt Lake City winter games
•
ve continents / designed in modern times

so what does
symbol mean?

7.8 Critical writing 309

then it has to be the other. You have to hold
the Games somewhere, or not hold them
at all.
When faced with a dilemma, you just have
to make a decision, or duck it and get caught
on both horns. Reaching such a decision, and
satisfying yourself or others that it is the right

decision, is what is meant by ‘resolving the
dilemma’.
Shortly you will have to make a decision
about which side you support, based on what
you know from reading the texts. You will
have to justify your decision by giving reasons
why it is the better of the two choices.

Summary
Synthesis, of the kind just described, not
only involves drawing together information, it
also means drawing together your skills, the
skills you have been acquiring and practising
throughout this course.

In the assignment you are about to
complete, you will find yourself calling on
them all: analysing, evaluating, inferring,
justifying, explaining, and developing further
argument.

End-of-chapter assignment
Write the speech that you will give to the
audience of athletes, business people, sports
fans and others who are concerned that the
Olympic Games are falling into disrepute
and straying from their original ideals. The
previous speaker in the debate was Janet
Sender: your job is either to support or to
oppose her proposal.

310 Unit 7 Critical reasoning: Advanced Level

Base your argument on the four documents
you have worked on, Docs 1–4. It is important
that you make reference to them. This is not
a test of your own wider knowledge of the
subject, but you may research further if you
wish.

Answers to assignments
This section contains answers and commentary
for the end-of-chapter assignments.
Cambridge International Examinations bears no
responsibility for the example answers to questions
taken from its past question papers which are
contained in this publication.

2.1 Claims, assertions, statements
1 A fact is a true claim. There is no such
thing as a false fact, but many false
claims are made.
2 ‘Assertion’ and ‘claim’ are very close in
meaning. The difference is in when you
use them. ‘Assertion’ is a bit stronger
and more emphatic; it is more active.
A claim may be asserted, but we would
not naturally say that an assertion was
claimed.
3 Variable responses
4 A theory is perhaps more firmly
established than a hypothesis; a
conjecture is more tentative than either.
Guessing and speculating are very
similar, and can be quite random, or
made without much thought. But all five
words have some meaning in common.
5 An allegation is a claim that is open to
challenge. An accusation is an allegation
usually made against someone; it is
normally negative or disapproving.
Insinuations are allegations, but the
word also suggests something a bit sly or
suggestive, rather than direct and open.
Confirmation is agreement or approval of
some claim already made. A denial is an
assertion that something is not so. A verdict
is a decision or judgement: for example, a
‘guilty’ verdict, or acquittal, in a legal trial.
6 Claims are presented as expressions
of truth, yet they are not always true.

Critical thinking is a way of being as
sure as possible about which claims
to believe, and which to question or
mistrust. Also, arguments consist of
claims: reasons, conclusions, etc.

2.2 Judging claims
1, 2 Variable responses
3 The first is stronger, because it sets a precise
date for the predicted extinction. It could
easily turn out to be unfounded. The
second claim would still be justified even if
polar bears live on for centuries, provided
there is some threat now to their existence.

2.3 Argument
1 There are several conclusions which could
be drawn from this passage. But there is
one obvious point to which it seems to be
leading: that minor crimes are as serious
as or more serious than traffic offences
(despite the consequences). A plausible
answer to the question could be that the
police should not neglect minor crime; or
perhaps even make it the priority. Note
that you do not have to agree with the
conclusion or the resulting argument.
You are looking for a claim which the
passage appears to support.
2–4 Variable responses

2.4 Identifying arguments
1 B is the only argument out of the three
passages. Its conclusion is that the public
should not expect the safety of drugs to be
guaranteed by animal testing. We can see
that the next two sentences express reasons
for making this claim. The clue is the phrase
‘These examples show that . . .’, which could
be understood as ‘It follows that . . .’ or just
‘So . . .’ In neither of the other passages is

	 ﻿Answers to assignments 311

there a point at which inserting such a
connective would make sense.
2 The second sentence is the best
expression of the conclusion: ‘The
machines are to blame.’ (It would not be
altogether wrong, however, to select the
first sentence.)
3 Variable responses

2.5 Analysing arguments
a

R1 Bottled water is meant to be safe
but there have been several health
alerts.
		 R2 Bottled water costs a lot.
		 R3 Tap water is just as good; and tap
water is free. (This could be two
separate reasons.)
	  
C   People shouldn’t be fooled into
buying bottled mineral water.
R1

R2

c T
 here are four reasons, all closely
interdependent:
R1 No sport should be allowed in which
the prime object is to injure an
opponent.
R2 No sport should be allowed in which
the spectators enjoy seeing
competitors inflict physical harm on
each other.
R3 What boxers have to do, in order to
win matches, is to batter their
opponents.
R4 Boxers do this in front of large,
bloodthirsty crowds.
	  
C   Boxing should be one of the first
sports to be outlawed.
R1 & R3

R2 & R4

R3 & R4
C

C

b

R1 Drugs can make the difference
between winning gold and winning
nothing.
		 R2 The rewards are so huge . . . that
the risk will seem worth taking.
	  
		 C   There will always be some athletes
who will give way to the temptation.

A
 lternatively R3 and R4 could be
reduced to one premise; but then it is
quite hard to show the structure. The
deeper analysis is more precise. (Note
that there is some room for variation in
the details of analysis.)

2.6 Complex arguments
1 E.g.
R1

R2

R3

R1 & R2
IC
C

	It is because R1 and R2 are both true
that the conclusion follows. If drugs
did not make a difference, or if the
rewards did not make the risk worth
taking, there would not be the same
temptation. So R1 and R2 are
interdependent.

312 Answers to assignments

C

2 The map and accompanying images add
weight to the argument by emphasising
and/or specifying/quantifying the claim
made by R3. It could alternatively be
understood as evidence for R3, showing
what a small proportion of countries

drive on the left. This would make
changing from left to right a simpler
procedure than right to left, thus adding
support to the conclusion.
3 a Context: Recently the operators of a
cruise liner were fined $18m for
dumping oil and other hazardous waste
at sea. This may seem substantial,
but . . .
R1 In the same year the ship earned
profits of $340m.
R2 The company could well afford the fine.
R3 Dumping saved them the
considerable expense of storing
and legally disposing of the waste.
	  
C1 (IC from R1–R3) Emptying their tanks
 into the ocean was probably a risk
worth taking.
R4 In the last decade only a handful of
companies have been fined.
R5 Every year there are unsuccessful
attempts to prosecute.
	  
C2 (IC) Dumping is not much of a risk.
R6 The oceans of the world are in
danger of becoming open sewers.
	  
C (main) We must give the authorities
greater powers and demand that
they use them.
		The two intermediate conclusions,
together with R6, are given as reasons
why the authorities ought to have
and use greater powers.
   b Context: Scientists have discovered some
three-million-year-old leaves preserved in the
ice (at the South Pole).
R1 The leaves are so undamaged, and
preserved in such fine detail, that
they could not have been carried
there by wind or sea.
	  
C1/IC They can only be from trees that
once grew there.

R2 The leaves belong to a species of
beech tree that grows only in warm
or temperate regions.
R3 Beeches do not evolve quickly
enough to adapt to changes in
climate.
	  
C   The South Pole must once have
been much warmer than it is today.
4 Various possible analyses, e.g.
R1 Grunting is a natural, unstoppable
accompaniment to sudden effort.
R2 Some women can control grunting,
others can’t.
R3 Some men grunt almost as much
as the women.
	  
IC   Making women play tennis in
near-silence would place an unfair
handicap on some but not on others.
	  
C   Grunting should not be banned
(in tennis).
Note: R3 may be said to be a side issue
that does not really contribute to the main
argument, which is about women. On
that interpretation it could be omitted.

2.7 Conclusions
1 The correct selection is C. Note that C is
actually a conjunction of two sentences,
one recommending the abolition of
charging, the other recommending an
alternative solution. Neither of these is a
reason for the other: they are like parallel
claims, or two sides of the same coin; and
they both follow from the other claims
that are made.
Distracters: A is introductory; B is one of
the reasons (premises); D is not stated at
all. On a casual reading the last sentence
might be mistaken for the conclusion,
but it is actually a premise.
2 The correct selection is A. The argument
begins halfway through, after ‘But . . .’
It states the conclusion first, then gives

	 ﻿Answers to assignments 313

reasons to support it, including the
intermediate conclusion that differing
fares are the only way the system can work.
Distracters: B is the intermediate
conclusion, and therefore a premise;
C and D are part of the introductory
information which provides the target
for the main argument; E is one of the
reasons which supports the intermediate
conclusion.
3 The correct selection is A. The actual
sentence that states the conclusion is
‘This is nonsense,’ but when you are
asked to express the conclusion, you
obviously need to say what ‘This’ is.
‘This’ refers to the target claim, ‘We must
be carnivores,’ as A correctly includes.
Distracters: B would be a premise, if it
were correctly interpreted. The actual
claim in the passage is that these foods
are the natural diet of our closest relatives
in the animal kingdom; C and D are
premises; E is implied in the introductory
sentence.

2.8 Reasons
1 This is open to debate. Some linguists and
logicians flatly deny that an argument can
have a question as its conclusion, unless it
is a question which is obviously rhetorical,
and has the meaning of a statement. But
this question really looks like a genuine
one: it is not saying either that the Red
Sox can win or that they can’t. So this is
a chance for students to develop their
own philosophical arguments. One line
of reasoning you might consider is that
the text gives a reason for asking the
question. However, does that make it an
argument or an explanation? Good luck!
2 Variable responses
3 Grammatically the premises are
not declarative sentences. One is an
imperative, the other a rhetorical
question. In standard form the argument
could be (e.g.):

314 Answers to assignments

R Statistically it can be seen that crime
has been rising.
	  
IC The current soft approach to crime is
not working.
	  
C If the courts don’t get back to
zero-tolerance, we face defeat in the
war on crime.
4 Variable responses
5 This is a difficult passage, although it is
short. The author is plainly approving of
random stop-and-search powers for the
police, but does not say so in as many
words. It could therefore be said that this
is an argument with an implicit rather
than an explicit conclusion. Or you could
say it was not an argument for that reason.
There is another possible interpretation,
which is that the last sentence is the
conclusion. But what is it actually
saying? Why would opponents of the bill
be helping the guilty? This is an exercise
in interpretation, which is why it is a
more challenging task.

2.9 Assumptions
1 a	A is clearly assumed. C is possibly
implied, but it is not key to the
argument; not necessary. The
argument could still be sound if Raisa
did not like novels much either, but
just didn’t hate them. B is interesting.
It need not be assumed: Raisa may love
mountain-climbing, but hate reading
about it for one reason or another.
b A and C are both assumed, and
for similar reasons. To meet the
conditions Nashida would have had
to suffer as a result of the changes,
and have left for that reason. D is also
assumed because it would have to be
the case that Nashida was forced to
accept the changes, i.e. had no choice.
B does not have to be assumed because

Nashida is not claiming she has been
unfairly dismissed.
c C is obviously assumed. A is not. If
it is read carefully it should be clear
that the argument would stand, i.e.
the conclusion would follow, even if
there had been no intention to entice
children to drink alcohol. It would still
be right to ban alcopops if this had
been an unintended consequence of
adding sweetener. D, likewise, is not
necessary for the argument.
B is the interesting one. You could say
it was implied in a way. You could say
that there would be no need to make
drinks sweet if children liked alcohol
anyway. But it isn’t really key to the
argument: children might like the taste
of alcohol, but like it more if it is sweet.
If you selected B as well as C, it is not
obviously wrong; but it is debatable.
2 Crucially this argument assumes that if
information is unregulated and/or there is
freedom of information, that is a bad thing.
There are other assumptions beside this,
but without this one, or something
equivalent, the argument definitely fails.
3 Variable responses (You could try writing
an argument that made no implicit
assumptions at all.)
4 Variable responses

2.10 Flaws and fallacies
1 a	The answer is B. The flaw is false
cause, or cause–correlation fallacy.
b A and less obviously B both weaken the
argument by suggesting that the causal
connection could be the reverse: that
success makes the workers less happy
(because they are less well cared for
in the case of B). That undermines
the conclusion that making workers
unhappy will lead to success. C does
not weaken the argument. If anything
it strengthens it.
2 a	
The fallacy could be described as overgeneralising from the particular, or

from inadequate, anecdotal evidence.
But equally it could be described as
a false cause, in the sense that lack
of exercise did not necessarily cause
Farrah Lavallier to have a long life. (She
might have had a long life despite not
because of it, or for some other reason.)
b B is the answer. It exposes the second
of the fallacies described above, by
suggesting a genetic explanation for
Farrah’s longevity: nothing to do with
saving her energy.
3 The graphs would give little or no support
to the conclusion. The conclusion is
very general, whereas the data in the
graphs concerns one city and one online
supplier. To argue on this basis would
commit the fallacy of generalising from
a single case; or of assuming that the city
and the supplier were representative or
typical. Even if the assumed correlation
were supported by the graph, it would still
not follow that the games were a causal
factor in the increased crime.
4 Ongoing project

3.1 What do we mean by a ‘problem’?
1, 2 Variable responses
3 The key here is to be systematic: did you
look at all the possibilities? Could you
find ways to save time, for example by
eliminating some orders which leap large
distances on each leg of the journey?
4 a	The answer is three. If the first two you
pick out are of different colours (the
‘worst-case scenario’), the third must
match one of them.
b The answer is two. As for the situation
above, if the first two are different, the
third must match one of them.
c The answer is nine. The first eight you
pull out could all be black; the ninth
must then be blue so you will have
one of each.
d The answer is eight. As above, the first
eight you take out could all be the
same.

	 ﻿Answers to assignments 315

e The answer is ten (note the difference
from 4a).The first eight you take out
could all be black. You would then need
to take out two more to get a blue pair.

3.2 How do we solve problems?
1 The efficiency (in km/litre) is distance
driven divided by petrol used. The
calculations may be approximated as
shown in brackets.
In order the cars are:
Riviera: 8 km/litre
Roamer: 8.8 km/litre (just under 9)
Stella: 9.375 km/litre (just under 10)
Montevideo: 12 km/litre
Carousel: 14.375 km/litre (over 14)
2 The object is to find how many
candidates still have a chance of
winning. We can do this by transferring
the votes from each candidate who
drops out to the next lowest. (This is
the maximum number of votes that
the second lowest-placed candidate
could receive after the withdrawal of the
bottom-placed candidate.) As the bottom
candidate is withdrawn each time, we
would then get the following results:
Original

After first After
withdrawal second
withdrawal

actual distribution of the votes of the
lower candidates. The one who survives
could go on to receive Brown’s vote and
win, so four candidates can still win.
3 This is a problem where we need to work
backwards. If we look at each dish in
turn, we can find out its timing so that it
is ready at 7 p.m.
 hicken: 15 minutes rest after 2 hours
C
of cooking. Turn on oven 15 minutes
before starting to cook.
Rice: 15 minutes cooking after
30 minutes soaking.
Broccoli: 5 minutes cooking after
5 minutes preparation.
Sauce: 15 minutes cooking after
10 minutes preparation.
Working out each event time and
putting them in order, we have:
Turn on oven

4.30 p.m.

Put in chicken

4.45 p.m.

Soak rice

6.15 p.m.

Prepare sauce

6.35 p.m.

Cook rice

6.45 p.m.

Cook sauce

6.45 p.m.

Patel

323

323

323

Remove chicken from oven

6.45 p.m.

Brown

211

211

211

Prepare broccoli

6.50 p.m.

Walshe

157

157

157

Cook broccoli

6.55 p.m.

Ndelo

83

83

158

Eat

7.00 p.m.

Macpherson

54

75

Gonzalez

21

At this stage, either Walshe or Ndelo
could be withdrawn, depending on the

316 Answers to assignments

4 As the length of the shelves is 1.6 m, they
must be cut lengthwise from the sheet of
wood. The 1.2 m side-pieces can be cut
either way. This leaves only two reasonable
options. The left-hand one clearly leads to
the larger uncut rectangle (in area).

Uncut rectangle
2.0 m × 0.6 m

Uncut
rectangle
1.2 m × 0.8 m

3.3 Selecting and using information
1 This graph can be drawn as either a bar
chart or a pie chart.
2 In 1984, vinyl single sales were 44% of
170 million, or 74.8 million; in 1994, they
were 26% of 234 million, or 60.8 million.
So A is correct – they fell by 14 million.
3 The five teams played each other once,
so there were ten games. The maximum
total number of points scored if each
resulted in a win for one of the teams
would have been 30. The actual total
number of points scored was 26. In
each drawn game a total of two points is
scored (i.e. one less than in a game with
a winner), so there must have been four
drawn games.
4 Each shelf requires 30 mm gap, 210 mm
for books and 20 mm for the shelf
thickness, or 260 mm in total. The
available gap is 2.5 m less 300 mm (as the
bottom shelf must not be too close to the
ground), or 2200 mm.
A maximum of 8 shelves at 260 mm total
can be fitted into 2200 mm.

3.4 Processing data
1 I buy three items at a total of $110. If I
deduct the least expensive ($30) before
the discount, I pay $80, with no discount.
If I get the discount first, the reduction is
$33, making the bill $77. However, I then

expect to get the least expensive item
free. After discount this will have cost $21
(70% of $30), so my bill will be reduced
to $56. Did you remember to reduce the
price of the least expensive item rather
than subtracting a further $30?
2 Sylvia’s total time for the first 5 laps is 5 ×
73 = 365 seconds. The time she is trying
to beat is 14 minutes 35 seconds or 875
seconds, so she must run within 875 −
365 = 510 seconds for the last 7.5 laps, or
68 seconds (1 minute 8 seconds) per lap.
3 The savoury pancakes come in these
types: egg; ham; tomato; egg and ham;
egg and tomato; ham and tomato; and
egg, ham and tomato – seven in total.
The sweet pancakes come in three types
(orange, lemon or strawberry) times two
toppings (cream or ice cream), making
six in total.
The number of combinations sold by
the stall is 13.
4 The monthly contract will cost me $30.
Texts are free but I will have to pay for
25 minutes of calls at 10¢ per minute, an
additional $2.50. The total is $32.50.
‘Pay as you go’ costs me 30¢ per minute
for 100 minutes of calls ($30) plus 60 text
messages at 10¢ each ($6), a total of $36
per month.
The monthly contract is better by $3.50.

3.5 Finding methods of solution
1 The difference in length between the
two pieces of chain is 8 cm and this
corresponds to the effective length of 10
links. The effective length of each link
is 0.8 cm but, because they overlap, the
actual length of each link is 1.2 cm (we
need to add twice the metal thickness as
can be seen in the diagram). The 34.2 cm
length has a 1 cm fitting at the end, so
without this it would be 33.2 cm long. This
length is made up of one full link length
(1.2 cm) plus a number of effective link
lengths (0.8 cm); you can also see this from

	 ﻿Answers to assignments 317

the diagram. So the number of links is
1 + (33.2 − 1.2)
= 41
0.8
The 26.2 cm length would be 25.2 cm
without the end fitting, so the number of
links is
1 + (25.2 − 1.2)
= 31
0.8
The total number of links is 72.
2 The plane’s velocity from Los Angeles to
Mumbai is 14,000
km/hr (636 km/hr).
22
From Mumbai to Los Angeles it is
14,000 km/hr (824 km/hr). The wind
17
velocity is half the difference (it adds
to the velocity one way and subtracts
in the other), 188
or 94 km/hr.
2
3 Lighthouse 1 flashes at 0, 11, 22 etc. seconds
from the beginning. Lighthouse 2 flashes
at 0, 3, 7, 17, 20, 24, 34 etc. It is possible
to list all the flashes of both until we find
a coincidence. Otherwise, we can look at
the various flashes of lighthouse 2. The first
flash repeats every 17, so would coincide
with the 11-second cycle at 187 seconds.
The others are offset by 3 and 7 seconds
from this (i.e. they repeat every multiple of
17 plus 3 and 7; the next ones are at 37 and
41 seconds), so we are looking for a multiple
of 17 which is smaller than a multiple of 11
by 3 or 7. Looking at 17, 34, 51, 68, none
work. However, 85 is 3 less than 88, so the
two lighthouses coincide after 88 seconds.
What is the next coincidence?
4 This appears to be a Venn diagram
problem, and one could be used to solve
it. However, there is an easier analysis.
If we add the number with neither (5)
to the number with a dog (13) and the
number with a panda (12), we get 30.
There are only 23 children in the class,
so the difference (7) must be the overlap,
or those with both a dog and a panda.
You might like to draw a Venn or Carroll
diagram to show all the subdivisions.

318 Answers to assignments

3.6 Solving problems by searching
1 There are a large number of ways of
paying, but clearly 1 adult + 1 senior
citizen + 2 children (total $32) comes
to more than the family ticket ($30), so
some combination using a family ticket
must be used.
Family ticket ($30)
+ 2 extra children ($10)
= $40
Single-adult family ticket ($20)
+ extra senior citizen ($5)
+ 2 extra children ($10)
= $35.
The latter is the best option.
2 The options to search involve dividing
the books as: 7, 5 + 2 or 4 + 3. (6 + 1
would be silly.) The prices, respectively,
are $3.20, $2.15 and $2.10. The last of
these is the best.
3 One can start listing the piles
systematically:
20 × 5¢
16 × 5¢ + 1 × 20¢
12 × 5¢ + 2 × 20¢
continuing to 5 × 20¢; thus there are
piles containing 0 to 5 × 20¢ coins, or 6
piles in total.
4 a	There are two ways to approach this:
to list all possible scores, and to look
at the make-up of the scores listed.
The first is probably safer, but more
time-consuming.
 8 is 6 correct and 1 wrong:
2
(6 × 5) – (1 × 2)
18 is 4 correct, 1 wrong and 2
unanswered: (4 × 5) – (1 × 2) + (2 × 0)
16 is 4 correct, 2 wrong and 1
unanswered: (4 × 5) – (2 × 2) + (1 × 0)
12 cannot be done
−1 is 1 correct, 3 wrong and 3
unanswered: (1 × 5) – (3 × 2) + (3 × 0).
So the Kool Kats score is incorrect.

b T
 his requires all the scores to be listed.
Other impossible scores are: 34, 33, 32,
31, 29, 27, 26, 24, 22, 19, 17, −9, −11, −13.

results. The final points totals in each case
are shown in the table below.
All of the final points situations given in the
table on page 105 are possible except D.
This question could also have been done
backwards: looking at each option given
and seeing whether that combination
was possible.
4 This is a question where elimination of
clearly incorrect answers will help. Both
B and D give a price of over $50 for one
poster, so cannot be possible. Choosing
between A and C, we note that C is much
higher for small numbers, costing over
$100 for three posters, whilst A is only
$90 for three. So C is correct.

3.7 Recognising patterns
1 Variable responses
2 The numbers of my birth date could be
from 01 to 31 (these are then reversed).
The numbers of my birth month could
be from 01 to 12 (these are also reversed).
We can then look at the options in turn:

So C is the only impossible number.
3 The first table shows the situation after
four of the six matches have been played.
The Britons have drawn two games, so the
matches B vs D and B vs S must have been
draws. The Normans have lost one of
their games, and this must have been to
the Danes. The remaining game already
played must have involved the Normans
beating the Saxons. This means the two
games to be played are B vs N and D vs S.
There are nine possible combinations of

B wins
/D
wins

B draws
/D
wins

B loses
/D
wins

B wins
/D
draws

3.8 Hypotheses, reasons,
explanations and inference
1 The effectiveness of drug A, allowing for
the gradual withdrawal, is shown in the
first graph.
Average e ectiveness

A with the respective parts reversed
becomes 23 12 – this is possible
(23 December).
B becomes 05 06 (5 June).
C becomes 11 14 (impossible – the
month cannot be more than 12).
D becomes 12 12 (12 December).
E becomes 21 09 (21 September).

10

Drug A

1

Time

B draws
/D
draws

B loses
/D
draws

B wins
/D
loses

B draws
/D
loses

B loses
/D
loses

B

5

3

2

5

3

2

5

3

2

D

7

7

7

5

5

5

4

4

4

N

3

4

6

3

4

6

3

4

6

S

1

1

1

2

2

2

4

4

4

	 ﻿Answers to assignments 319

Average e ectiveness

The overall effectiveness will be the sum
of the first graph and that for drug B. It
will appear as in the second graph.
10

Overall

both an orange and a dollar must be
worth less than a grapefruit).
• We can say nothing about the value of
a lemon relative to a grapefruit.
4 The information we have directly is:
Mon Tue

1

L

x

M

Y

Fri

Sat

Sun

x
x

Y

x

x

Y

x

Y

Y

Time
N

The sizes and positions of the peak and
dip will depend on the exact values for
the original two curves.
2 Whilst this could be solved with a Venn
or Carroll diagram, the problem is simple
enough not to require either. Since
the percentages studying French and
German add to 115%, there must be at
least a 15% overlap so D is true.
Looking at the alternatives:
A It is possible that the 30% not
studying French are also part of the
55% not studying German.
B There is no reason to assume that 23 of
those who study German (30% of all
students) coincide with the 30% who do
not study French.
C This comes from subtracting the 45
from the 70. This number has no
meaning other than being the
maximum percentage who could
study French but not German.
3 C is the correct answer. The only firm
deductions that can be made are:
• A dollar has a value between that
of an orange and a lemon (but it is
impossible to tell which is higher and
which is lower, so neither A nor D can
be correct).
• The value of a grapefruit is one orange
plus one dollar (so C is correct and

320 Answers to assignments

Wed Thu

x

O

Y

Y

(We are given Moses’ three days off, so he
must work the other four. Liam is off on
Saturday, so the other three work).
	 From the table, we can see that Liam
and Orla must work on Friday.
	 Orla can then not work Wednesday
or Sunday or she would work four
consecutive days.
	 Therefore, Liam and Nadila must work
on Sunday and Liam on Wednesday. We
can fill in the table as far as shown below.
Mon Tue
L

x

M

Y

Wed Thu
Y

x

Y

N

x

O

x

x

Y

Fri

Sat

Sun

Y

x

Y

x

Y

Y

x

Y

Y

Y

Y

x

	We can now see that Nadila cannot work
both Monday and Tuesday or it would be
four in a row, so she must work Thursday,
and Liam must work Tuesday. This leaves
the only remaining flexibility that
Nadila and Orla must each work one of

Monday and Tuesday, but neither can
work both.
The only one of the options possible is B:
Nadila could work on Sunday and Monday.

3.9 Spatial reasoning

5 Only D works. If you have doubts,
try them.
6 B is correct. Again, you can try it to
make sure.

3.10 Necessity and sufficiency

1 The letters should look as follows:

CFRSN
2 Variable responses
3 It is best to draw lines on the diagram
to show the points on the route from
X to Y where the view of the flagpoles
changes:
R

Y

O

B

G

W

X

Y

As you walk from left to right, the
orders will be:
RBYOGW
RBYGOW
BRYGOW
BRGYOW
BGRYOW
BGRYWO
There are six different orders in total.
4 The clock represented conventionally
will look as follows:

The time is 10.15; D is correct.

1 I have a free choice where I put the
numbers 1 to 3 (but none may go
opposite a number I have already
marked). Number 4 must go on one of
the two faces remaining that do not
contain 1 to 3 or are not opposite any
of them. However, it can go on either
of these two remaining faces, so I can
number four faces before I am left with
no choice.
2 We are looking for the highest total that
can be made in only one way. The total
number of pieces of fruit is 5 times the
number of pear bags (5p) plus 3 times
the number of banana bags (3b). We
can list the total (5p + 3b) for various
numbers of each kind of bag or we
can see which numbers, successively,
are possible. If we look at successive
combinations (assuming there is at
least one of each type of bag), we find
that the first sum that can be made in
two ways is 23, i.e. (5 × 4) + (3 × 1) and
(5 × 1) + (6 × 3). 24 is unique, as is 25.
26 can be made in two ways. We need
to carry on looking until we find three
successive numbers that can be made
in two ways – these turn out to be 31,
32 and 33. Subsequently, any higher
number can be made in two ways by
adding extra 3s to these. Thus the
highest number that cannot be made
in two ways is 30: 3 bags of pears and 5
bags of bananas. This is the number that
George must have had in stock.
3 We know Kuldip had 12 coins with
a different number of each; with the
number of 5¢ more than the number of
2¢, which was more than the number of
1¢. All the options can now be listed:

	 ﻿Answers to assignments 321

2 In 5 minutes Finn has travelled 0.5 km.
Finn travels at 6 km/h, Alice at 18 km/hr.
Alice is catching up with him at 12 km/hr so
it takes her 012.5 hours to catch up. In this time
she has travelled 18 × 012.5 km, or 0.75 km, so
she overtakes him at the halfway point.
The journey takes 15 minutes for Finn
and 60 × 118.5 = 5 minutes for Alice, so for
them to arrive together, she would have
to leave 10 minutes after him.
3
Number
Price
Unit price

1¢

2¢

5¢

Total

1

2

9

50¢

1

3

8

47¢

1

4

7

44¢

1

5

6

41¢

2

3

7

43¢

2

4

6

40¢

1

$1.20

$1.20

3

4

5

36¢

2

$2.40

$1.20

We need to look at each of A–D in turn.

3

$2.40

$0.80

4

$3.60

$0.90

5

$4.80

$0.96

6

$4.80

$0.80

7

$6.00

$0.86

8

$7.20

$0.90

9

$7.20

$0.80

10

$8.40

$0.84

bought

A is not sufficient information as two
options have three 2¢ coins.
B is not sufficient as two totals are
multiples of 10¢.
C identifies a unique combination: in the
second to last row, 5¢ coins add to 30¢
which is 3 4 of the total, so this is the
correct answer.
D is not sufficient because two options
(rows 3 and 5) have two more 5¢ coins
than 1¢ and 2¢ together.

1 Both tubes should be approximately 1 3 full
as 4 hours is 1 3 of 12 hours and 20 minutes
is 1 3 of 60 minutes. Strictly speaking, the
hours tube should be a very small amount
fuller as it should show 4 1 3 hours.

Unit price ($)

3.11 Choosing and using models
1.30
1.20
1.10
1.00
0.90
0.80
0.70

1

2

3

4
5
6
7
Number bought

8

9

One or two alternative offers should be
selected (for example the ‘buy one, get one
half price’ suggested) and the tabulation and
graphing procedure shown above should be
repeated for these.

322 Answers to assignments

10

It is not trivial to generate a mathematical
formula or rule from a graph, but a useful first
step would be to reverse the above process and
generate the table from the graph. We can
then identify what the price of one item is,
and then the unit price of each subsequent
item bought. Offers such as ‘buy two, get one
free’ will generally produce cyclic graphs like
that shown in the first example. Offers such as
‘20% off if you spend over $20’ will give a
discontinuity in either the value or the
gradient of the graph. Such observations may
help to identify the nature of the offer.

3.12 Making choices and decisions
1 If you have a score of 17, the possible
outcomes (only allowing one more
throw) are:
No extra throw
One extra throw

Win 3
1

Win 3

2

Win 6

3

Win 8

4

Win 10

5

Lose 4

6

Lose 4

Averaging the outcomes with the extra
throw (all scores are equally possible):
(3 + 6 + 8 + 10 − 4 − 4)/6 = 19 6 , so the
average is a win of just over 3. The score
with no extra throw is a win of 3, so it is
marginally better to throw again.
2 If Clyde spends $29.99, he will get a 2¢
voucher that will save him 60¢ on petrol,
so his effective spend is $29.39. Any
spend over $30 in the shop will get him
a 3¢ voucher, saving him 90¢ on petrol,
so he can spend up to $30.29 (an extra
30¢) without increasing his overall bill.
Similarly, if he spends $49.99, he could

spend up to $50.29 without increasing
the bill.
3 D is not possible as there is no subject
from the third column.
4 34¢ can be made up as 22¢ + 9¢ + 2¢ + 1¢;
any other combination needs at least one
more denomination. 67¢ can be made up
as 3 × 22¢ + 1¢, so no extras are needed.
$1.43 can be made up as 6 × 22¢ + 9¢ +
2¢, so four denominations are needed in
total: 22¢, 9¢, 2¢ and 1¢.

4.1 Inference
2 There are a number of clues that you
could have noted. One is that the
two people are walking in opposite
directions. Look at their knees if you
missed this point. This fact makes D
quite implausible. C is not impossible,
i.e. that the contact between L’s hand
and the bag is accidental; but if you look
closely at L’s fingers, it would be unlikely
that his or her hand would be in that
position unintentionally. The position
of L’s fingers also make it less likely
that L was reaching into the bag; more
likely that he or she was grasping it. A is
therefore a more plausible explanation
than B.
A is probably the most plausible of
the four suggestions, but is it the best
possible explanation? It is hard to see
what else might be going on, and A is
not far-fetched. People do, unfortunately,
snatch bags. R is carrying the bag
carelessly, and it would be very easy
for L to pull it off R’s shoulder and run.
R has no grip on it that we can see.
Our answer is, therefore, that A is a
reasonable conclusion to draw. However,
you may have a better explanation.
There is no right or wrong answer:
what matters is that you made full use
of the information, and did not jump
to conclusions without being able to
give good reasons using the evidence
available.

	 ﻿Answers to assignments 323

4.2 Explanation
1 A explanation; B explanation;
C argument; D argument; E explanation.
In all five cases reasons are given, but
only in C and D do the reasons function
as support for a conclusion.
2 B and C, if true, could explain the data. A
is simply a summary or interpretation of
the data: an observation. D is an inferred
generalisation, and not necessarily a safe
one.
3 Variable responses. (For example, that car
claims have risen so significantly it may
give the impression of a general rise. Or
that it seems likely that claims would rise,
and it is therefore assumed that they have.)
4 Variable responses. (In brief: primarily the
passage is explaining why mountainclimbing ethics have changed. However,
it could be added that in explaining why
they have changed, the author is also
making the case that they have changed,
and changed for the worse. It is a good
example of the boundary between
argument and explanation becoming
blurred at times.)

4.3 Evidence
1 Check your answer against the three
relevant sections of the chapter,
beginning with ‘Types of evidence’ on
page 145. Examples: variable.
2 a 	Mrs Short’s evidence provides
corroboration only in the sense that
it concurs with Green’s claim. But
her evidence is somewhat vague and
uncertain. We have no information
about Mrs Short herself: her age,
alertness, etc., or her relation to Green
other than their being neighbours. It
is weak evidence, possibly biased by
acquaintance / friendship.
b The restaurant owner is not
independent, so his reliability as a
witness is questionable.
c Long, we are told, is independent
inasmuch as he does not know

324 Answers to assignments

either party involved in the incident.
However, his evidence is compromised
by the fact that he did not come
forward until after he had seen White
and his car in a news photograph, and
knew that White had been arrested.
This knowledge makes his claims
unreliable.
d If Mrs Short is right about seeing a
parking ticket on the suspected car,
an obvious step would be to find out
if a ticket had been issued to White
on the day in question. If so it would
mean White and the restaurant owner
were lying, and one would have to
ask why. A parking ticket in such a
situation would come close to being
the ‘smoking gun’.
3 Variable responses

4.4 Credibility
Responses will vary, but the following very
brief notes may be useful.
1 You should have considered the
following criteria:
plausibility of the statements made
reputation (position, status, etc.)
expertise; experience
possibility of vested interest
corroboration (if any) and whether
or not it is independent.
2 The most important items are the two
songs, including the chords, and what can
be inferred reliably from the similarities
and/or differences between them.
3 Obviously what Ewbank writes is hearsay,
not direct testimony. She is reporting what
those involved in the case have said when
interviewed, and in response to questions.
However, she is allegedly quoting them
directly in many cases. She also produces
some factual evidence, such as the content
of Berry’s scrapbook, and the song itself.
These factors need to be taken into account
when deciding how reliable her report is.
4, 5 Variable responses
•
•
•
•
•

4.5 Two case studies
Variable responses

4.6 Critical thinking and science
Variable responses

4.7 Introducing longer arguments
1 If the bored and disadvantaged young men
knew that the police were banned from
chasing stolen cars, they might not find the
theft of a car so exciting, and a ban may not,
after all, lead to an increase in car thefts.
2 Variable responses

4.8 Applying analysis skills
Variable responses

4.9 Critical evaluation
1 The obvious flaw here is the straw man.
It distorts the author’s argument by
making the conclusion much too strong
and creating a soft target for its own
attempted refutation. The author does not
advocate denying a job to anyone who has
committed a crime, but makes the more
moderate claim that serious criminals
should not be lauded as celebrities. If this
had been correctly represented the counterargument would be a slippery slope.
2 The argument is blatantly circular. It
uses the claim that the dinosaurs were
rendered extinct by a single catastrophe
to draw the intermediate conclusion that
they were wiped out almost overnight.
But from this it then argues back to the
starting premise that the cause must
have been a single catastrophic event
rather than a gradual process.
3 Variable responses

4.10 Responding with further
argument
Variable responses

4.11 A self-assessment
1 If the source of a document is a person
or organisation which has a special
interest in an outcome, or a theory

being right, then it may be slanted or
biased. This article is from the magazine
of a conservation society for dolphins.
Its author is likely to have high regard
for these creatures and may – but not
necessarily does – exaggerate their
intelligence to argue for their rights. The
article may still make fair claims: it is
from a respectable publication. But the
potential for partiality must be recognised
and taken into account in the evaluation.
2 It is scientific in that it is based on
observation rather than mere opinion –
at least up to the point where the author
introduces ethical claims and ideas
about ‘non-human persons’ in the last
paragraph. The argument is sufficiently
cautious to be taken seriously: it talks
of ‘contentions’ and offers plausible
explanations rather than drawing strong
and unwarranted conclusions from the
limited evidence. It could be described
as a mixture of scientific reasoning and
speculative thinking. However, there is a
part of the argument that is speculative
rather than scientific. What animals
deserve, what rights or status they should
be given, how they should be treated and
so on are ethical questions, and cannot
be answered within a rigorously scientific
context.
3
A is assumed. If it were not true it
could not really be argued that the
lack of an obvious benefit means that
they seem to walk on water for fun.
B is not assumed because the author
implies that it is unusual for a
cultural activity not to be linked to
food (in animals).
C is not assumed. It is a different issue
altogether.
D is not assumed either. Although the
author suggests that dolphins walk on
water for fun in the wild, it does not
mean they have to enjoy performing
tricks in general, or enjoy anything at

	 ﻿Answers to assignments 325

all that they do in captivity. They may
enjoy it, but it is not necessary for the
argument that they do.
4, 5 Variable responses

5.1 Combining skills – using
imagination
1 a (i)   The last two digits of the year are
split – into first and last (sixth)
position, with the month in
second and third and the day in
fourth and fifth. 17 March 1981
(170381) would appear as 803171.
(ii)  Each had a repeated digit (two
zeros) so from only one of the
numbers they could not be sure
which one was moved to which
position. Because the repeats are
in different places for the two
people, a pattern can be found
by comparing the two numbers.
(iii) Any date where all the six digits are
distinct is necessary and sufficient:
e.g. 23 Jan 1945 or 17 March 1982.
  A number such as 11 November
1911 is a special case. It would
allow the particular birth date to
be predicted, but would not give
the general pattern.
b This introduces a new factor: the
distinction between male and female
numbers, which adds a level of
complexity.
(i)   662126 would give the month
as 62, and 752232 the month as
52, so a five must be added to the
tens of the month (the second
digit of the six) for female drivers.
(ii)  Jocelyn was born on 23 February
1972.
c This question requires you to generate
your own method for distinguishing
between different groups. To keep
all the existing information, the
new system would need to use
values which cannot exist using the

326 Answers to assignments

current system. The simplest ways
to do this are by adding 4, 5 or 6 to
the fourth digit (because currently
the fourth digit will always be 0, 1,
2 or 3, so digits 4–9 would clearly
denote foreign-born licence holders)
or adding 2 or 3 to the second digit
(in the current scheme this number
could only be 0, 1, 5 or 6).
Another, more complicated, method
would be to add a number between
31 and 69 (inclusive) to the date
(fourth and fifth digits), as this could
otherwise only lie between 01 and
31. Any unambiguous and consistent
method would be acceptable as an
answer.
d This question requires you to show
how the number system can be
used in a practical way. As almost
all parents are at least ten years
older, the deception is certain to be
noticed. Your answer should express
the probability as certain. If you
state that it is a high probability, you
should also explain your answer – a
parent will almost definitely be more
than ten years older than their
child – to get the mark.
e Excluding the digits denoting the
year, there are 10,000 possible
numbers (0000-9999), of which
only 365 (or 366 in a leap year) are
valid. So (10,000 – 365) ÷ 10,000
= 96.35%. A good approximation
would be acceptable. One simple
error, for example using 9999 instead
of 10,000 or trying to incorporate
a factor for a wrong year would
normally lose only some of the
available marks.
2 The Fastrack bus leaves Aaland at 8 a.m.,
so passes through the three villages at
8.10, 8.20 and 8.30, arriving at Matsberg
at 8.40. The Stagebus leaves Matsberg
at 7.45 and takes 1 hour 15 minutes,
including three 5-minute stops, so takes

3

4

5

5

15 minutes between villages. Thus it is at
village 1 (nearest Matsberg) from 8.00 to
8.05, at village 2 from 8.20 to 8.25 and
at village 3 from 8.40 to 8.45, arriving
at Aaland at 9.00. They both arrive at
village 2 at 8.20, so C is correct.
Dunrovia has 6 points – this can only
be obtained by two wins and one loss.
Similarly, Arbadia’s and Brindling’s score
of 4 points can only be achieved by one
win, one draw and one loss. Crittle’s
score of 2 points can only be obtained by
two draws and a loss.
a Crittle drew two matches. Two other
teams drew a match each; thus Crittle
must have drawn with both Arbadia
and Brindling. Two matches were
drawn.
b Crittle drew two matches and lost one;
Dunrovia won two and lost one. Thus
Dunrovia must have beaten Crittle.
c This leaves three games unaccounted
for: D vs A, D vs B and A vs B, none
of them draws. If Brindling beat
Dunrovia, Dunrovia must have
beaten Arbadia, and Arbadia must
have beaten Brindling.
If Chico’s bill was $3 more than the
average, Andy and Benita would have
paid $13.50 each ($12 + $ 3 2 ) if all had
paid the average. Thus Chico’s individual
bill was $16.50.
If the border is the same all the way
around, and there is one more square
vertically than horizontally, the
difference between the two dimensions
must be the same as one square. Thus the
squares are 0.3 m × 0.3 m. The border is
0.1 m on each side.
The total expenses were 2 × $400 (two
weeks’ fixed costs) + $1400 for materials,
or $2200 in total. Thus the profit was
$2700, or $900 each. Bill had paid out
$800, so Fred owes him $1700. Harry had
paid out $1400, so Bill owes him $2300,
leaving $900 for himself.

5.2 Developing models
1 Let us assume that Duane walks x km. It
doesn’t matter whether this is done as a
single stage or they swap bike and walk
several times – it is only important how
far in total each walks and rides.
Duane’s total journey time is
x (12 − x )
+
.
15
6
Mervin’s total journey time is
x
12 − x
+
20
4
If they arrive at town at the same time:
x
(12 − x )
x
(12 − x )
+
=
+
6
15
20
4
Multiplying both sides by 60:
10x + 4(12 − x) = 3x + 15(12 − x)
or 10x + 48 − 4x = 3x + 180 − 15x
Simplifying:
18x = 132

or x = 7.33 km

The total time is:
x
(12 − x )
 +
= 1.22 + 0.31
6
15
= 1.53 hours (1 hour 32 minutes)
We still have to convince ourselves that
arriving at the same time is the best
strategy. Suppose Duane (the faster
walker) walks the whole way. It takes
him two hours. Clearly any strategy in
which Duane walks more than 7.33 km
will result in a slower time (nearer to two
hours). It is even worse if Mervin walks
further as he is a slower walker.
2 a Two orientations are possible.
• A
 long a 2 × 2 face:
time = 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 = 4 mins
• A
 long a 6 × 2 face:
time = 3 + 1 3 + 3 + 1 3 = 6 mins 40 secs
So four minutes is the minimum possible
time.
b Three orientations are possible.
• A
 long the 1 × 4 face:
distance = 1 + 4 + 1 + 4 = 10 m

	 ﻿Answers to assignments 327

• A
 long the 1 × 6 face:
distance = 1 + 6 + 1 + 6 = 14 m
• A
 long the 6 × 4 face:
distance = 6 + 4 + 6 + 4 = 20 m
If you give more distances than this, do
not award yourself any marks.
c The principles for using the model
having been developed in the first two
questions, this question now asks for a
real application of its use.
To minimise the number of turns
required, we need to find the face of a
24 m3 block that would have the largest
possible perimeter.
Assuming the lengths are integers, this
would be a 24 m × 1 m face, giving us a
perimeter of 50 m.
610 ÷ 50 = 12 revolutions (48 turns of
90°) with 10 m remaining. We are able
to choose whether the block is standing
upright or lying down at the beginning,
which allows us to choose which way it
is standing at the end. If it starts each full
revolution upright then it can pass the
610 m mark with one more 90° turn, so it
would take 49 turns in total.
If you did not give 49 as your answer,
you might still claim two marks if you
gave the number of complete revolutions
or half revolutions for a 24 × 1 face, or
if you gave the number of 90° turns
for a set of measurements which could
reasonably be encountered for a 24 m3
block (12 × 2, 8 × 3, 6 × 4, 6 × 2, 4 × 3, 3 ×
2, 2 × 2, 1 × 1). Award yourself one mark
if you calculated using one of the sets of
measurements in brackets, but gave the
number of 180° or 360° turns.
d Here, the model is used to find the
optimum dimensions of a 24 m3 block in
order to move it quickly.
The optimum dimensions are 4 m × 6 m.
To calculate the time taken to complete
610 m:

328 Answers to assignments

Number of revolutions =
30, with 10 m remaining

610
=
(6 + 4 + 6 + 4)

1
6 4
mins
One revolution = 2  +  = 4
 4 6
3
3
3 2

Total time =  30 × 4  + + =

2
2 3
132 mins
If you failed to find the shortest possible
time, you may award yourself:
• t hree marks for a correctly calculated
time under 300 minutes (using
possible dimensions)
• t wo marks for a correctly calculated
time over 300 minutes (using
possible dimensions)
• o
 ne mark if you showed you knew to
multiply the speed of a full revolution
by the number of revolutions needed,
but made an error in your calculation.
e There are two ways to achieve a time
under 500 minutes:
Blocks sized 20 + 20 + 21 will take
(139 mins 24 secs) + 5 mins
+ (139 mins 24 secs) + 5 mins
+ (168 mins 29 secs)
= 457 mins 17 secs.
Blocks sized 21 + 24 + 16 will take
(168 mins 29 secs) + 5 mins
+ (132 mins 10 secs) + 5 mins
+ (153 mins)
= 463 mins 39 secs.
 ward yourself full marks for the above
A
solutions (rounding is acceptable).
Award yourself three marks for correctly
calculated answers that add up to 61
m3, or one mark for choosing block sizes
adding up to 61 m3 and another for
calculating the time taken to move any
block 610 m.
f Answering this question involves
developing a new use of the model to
investigate moving a large amount of stone.

The quickest way of transporting
between 61 and 70 m3 of stone is to move
two 24 m3 blocks and one 20 m3 block:
Blocks sized 24 + 24 + 20 will take
(132 mins 10 secs) + 5 mins
+ (132 mins 10 secs) + 5 mins
+ (139 mins 24 secs)
= 413 mins 44 secs.
 ward yourself full marks if you correctly
A
identified the correct combination of
blocks: 24 + 24 + 20.
Award yourself one mark for 24 + 20 + 20,
or 24 + 24 + 16.
3 We need to calculate the total race time
for the various numbers of pit stops. For 1
pit stop, 150 litres of fuel are required for
each half of the race. The average lap time
(0.12 seconds slower than 75 seconds for
each 5 litres of fuel) is, therefore:
75
75 + 0.12  = 76.8 seconds
 5
So 60 laps takes 60 × 76.8 = 4608 seconds.
The time for the pit stop is
10 +

150
= 20 seconds
15

so the total race time is 4628 seconds
(77 minutes 8 seconds).
For two stops, the calculation is based on
an average fuel load of 50 litres, so the
average lap time is 76.2 seconds and the
pit stop time is 16.7 seconds.
The total time is

As a further exercise you might consider
how the problem could be tackled if
the distance between pit stops was not
constant (for example, it might be worth
filling the car right up at the start to save
on refuelling time, although this would
make it slower).
4 It is more straightforward to work in
proportions than percentages. Suppose
the proportions are as follows: x Brazil
nuts, y walnuts and (1 − x − y) hazelnuts.
The cost to the shopkeeper for this mix
is 40x + 35y + 20(1 − x − y). She wishes to
make 50% profit selling it at 60¢, so 60¢
represents twice this value.
We now have a model:
40x + 35y + 20(1 − x − y) = 30
Simplifying:
20x + 15y = 10
This cannot be solved explicitly for x and y,
so we must investigate different values. We
(2 − 4 x )
can note that y =
, so this gives a
3
relationship between the two (and implies
the proportion of the third ingredient).
Putting some values into this:
x (Brazil nuts)

y (walnuts)

z (hazelnuts)

0.0

0.67

0.33

0.1

0.53

0.37

0.2

0.40

0.40

60 × 76.2 + 2 × 16.7 = 4605.4 seconds

0.3

0.27

0.43

or 76 minutes 45.4 seconds.
For three stops, the average fuel load is 37.5
litres, the average lap time is 75.9 seconds
and the pit stop time is 15 seconds.
The total time is

0.4

0.13

0.47

0.5

0.00

0.50

0.6

−0.13

0.53

60 × 75.9 + 3 × 15 = 4599 seconds
or 76 minutes 39 seconds. Therefore three
pit stops is optimum. Should you consider
four?

Thus there is a range of mixes that fulfil
the conditions, from 0 to 50% Brazil nuts.
We can test one of these answers: 1kg
can be made up of 20% Brazil nuts,
costing 8¢, 40% walnuts costing 14¢ and

	 ﻿Answers to assignments 329

40% hazels costing 8¢, a total of 30¢.
The most even mix is around 30% Brazil
nuts – can you define it more closely?

5.3 Carrying out investigations
1 a	This must be carried out by looking
at amounts successively. There is more
than one way of doing some of the
amounts; only one is shown:

nth triangular number. So, for a 4 × 4
square, there are 30 oranges, and we then
add 10 (the 4th triangular number) for
each extra row, so a 4 × 5 box contains 40,
a 4 × 6 box contains 50, and so on.
3 There are 36 combinations of two dice.
Winning combinations are:
1, 4

where n represents the number of
oranges on one side of the square.
	For a rectangular box, students should
tabulate a series of values for n × m boxes.
They would be expected to recognise
that the pattern depends on the smallest
square that would be fitted into this box
(i.e. an n × n square if n<m). For rectangles
based on a given value of n, each extra
row adds a further number which is the

330 Answers to assignments

1, 6

2, 5

2, 6

3, 6

and the reverse of these (4, 1; 5, 1 etc.),
so 12 of the 36 combinations win, or 1 3 .
If 200 people play, Milly takes $200 and
will expect to pay out 2 × 200
or $133,
3
so she should raise $67.
Investigating alternatives is again quite
open-ended. We can look at the two
options suggested. Multiples give:

 ¢ = 1¢; 2¢ = 2¢; 3¢ = 1¢ + 2¢;
1
4¢ = 2¢ + 2¢; 5¢ = 5¢; 6¢ = 5¢ + 1¢;
7¢ = 5¢ + 2¢; 8¢ = 10¢ − 2¢;
9¢ = 10¢ − 1¢; 10¢ = 10¢;
11¢ = 10¢ + 1¢; 12¢ = 10¢ + 2¢;
13¢ cannot be done in two coins.

First die

Second die

b This part of the investigation is openended. A systematic approach should
be taken, possibly starting with the
1, 3, 5 . . . example (in order to make
7, a 7¢, 8¢, 10¢ or 12¢ coin would be
needed and others follow from this). If
a set does not include a 1¢ coin, then
two denominations must differ by 1¢.
2 A 2 × 2 box contains 4 + 1 = 5 oranges;
a 3 × 3 box has 9 + 4 + 1 = 14. Each
successive size can be worked out as
the square number plus the sum of the
square numbers below it, so a 5 × 5 box
has 25 + 16 + 9 + 4 + 1 = 55 oranges.
As advanced level mathematics is not
expected for this paper, this answer
would be sufficient. The general
formula is
n(2n + 1)(n + 1)
6

1, 5

1

2

3

4

5

6

1

1

2

3

4

5

6

2

2

4

6

8

10

12

3

3

6

9

12

15

18

4

4

8

12

16

20

24

5

5

10

15

20

25

30

6

6

12

18

24

30

36

She needs players to win less than half
the time to make a profit. There are
17 values in the table of 12 or over, so 12
is the minimum winning score which
would guarantee her a profit. If players
have to score over 12 to win, this would
give odds of 13
36 – similar to those in the
original game.
One can similarly investigate the two
values written as a two-digit number (it
may be necessary to colour the dice to
define which is the first digit).

5.4 Data analysis and inference
1 a	Statement A cannot be confirmed.
Over the last 22 years, the discovery of
new resources has matched the rate of
depletion for both oil and gas. Whether
this will continue to happen in the
future, and for how long, is not certain.
		Statement B is true if stated in terms
of years of potential supply. The 2011
proved gas reserves are equivalent to
60 years’ consumption and the oil just
over 40.
		Statement C is true, as stated for
A: the graphs of potential years of
supply are approximately horizontal.
		D is also true. Energy consumption is
rising (graph 2) so, if the reserves are
constant in terms of years of supply,
the rate of discovery must be increasing
in a similar manner to the rate of usage.
		E is not true. It would lead to the
potential years’ reserves in graph 1
falling.
b In the 1980s there must have been
a surge of exploration and discovery
of new reserves. As the usage was
fairly constant, this led to an increase
in the known years of supply. Since
then, discoveries have just matched
consumption. Other factors may be
involved.
c If the discovery of new reserves fails to
match consumption, prices will rise.
This will lead to a variety of things,
one being a search for alternative
energy sources (which will become
more attractive as the price for energy
is higher); another is a recession
in world trade (this would reduce
consumption and ease prices); and a
third is a search for increased energy
efficiency. You should comment on
these, their implications and any
other factors you can think of which
are relevant. This is a good topic for
class discussion.

2 a	Greece and Spain have 4 points: this
could only be achieved by one win
and one draw. Portugal have 3 points:
only a win and a loss would give this.
Russia have lost both their games.
These results are shown in the table.
Team

Played Points W D

L Goals Goals
for
against

Greece

2

4

1

1

0

3

2

Spain

2

4

1

1

0

2

1

Portugal

2

3

1

0

1

3

2

Russia

2

0

0

0

2

0

3

		Russia have lost to both Spain and
Portugal (they have yet to play
Greece). Spain must have drawn with
Greece (only one match was drawn).
Greece must have beaten Portugal (this
is the only game not accounted for).
		Russia lost one game 1–0 and the other
2–0 (the only way of making 3 goals
against).They could not have lost 2–0
to Spain as Spain would then have lost
their other game (their total is 2 for
and 1 against). Thus Russia lost 2–0 to
Portugal and 1–0 to Spain. We can now
work out all the results and scores:
Greece 2 Portugal 1
Greece 1 Spain 1
Spain 1 Russia 0
Portugal 2 Russia 0
b There are nine possibilities for the
remaining two games (either team can
win, or the game can be drawn, giving
three possible results for each game;
3 × 3 = 9). Russia cannot finish in the
first two, but the three other teams can.
The situation can be analysed backwards
(e.g. if Greece win or draw they are
through, as Spain are playing Portugal
and both cannot get 3 points). The full
analysis is given in the following table
. (GbR means Greece beat Russia; GdR
means Greece drew with Russia.)

	 ﻿Answers to assignments 331

SbP

SbP

SbP

SdP

SdP

SdP

PbS

PbS

PbS

GbR

GdR

RbG

GbR

GdR

RbG

GbR

GdR

RbG

Greece

7

5

4

7

5

4

7

5

4

Spain

7

7

7

5

5

5

4

4

4

Portugal

3

3

3

4

4

4

6

6

6

Russia

0

1

3

0

1

3

0

1

3

Qualify

GS

GS

GS

GS

GS

Fertiliser: g/m2

332 Answers to assignments

GP

GP

P*

Greece and Portugal went through.
Portugal had the only positive goal
difference and Greece had scored more
goals than Spain.
3 This is another open-ended problem.
As much as possible should be extracted
from the data given: this involves
averaging the rows and columns,
graphing both these averages and
the individual values, and drawing
appropriate conclusions.
The table, with averages included, can
be used to create graphs:

		The result is clear in all but two
columns. In column 6, Greece and
Portugal finish level on points but
Greece qualify as they beat Portugal.
		In column 9, Greece and Spain finish
equal and they drew their game. The
scores of the two games will determine
who goes through, whether on goal
difference, goals scored or drawing
of lots. Can you determine which
scores will lead to which outcome?
The actual result was column 9 (Spain
0 Portugal 1, Russia 2 Greece 1), so

Crop yield: kg/m2

GS

Water input: litres/m2/day
5

10

15

20

25

30

Average

0

3.55

4.58

5.76

5.36

4.04

2.04

4.22

5

4.54

5.83

7.16

7.54

6.82

4.73

6.11

15

5.21

7.73

9.22

9.32

9.06

8.89

8.24

20

4.85

6.89

8.95

10.27

10.40

9.38

8.46

25

3.97

6.42

9.04

9.62

10.83

10.32

8.37

Average

4.42

6.29

8.03

8.42

8.23

7.07

7.08

9
8
7

12

6

10

5
4

0

5

10
15
20
25
Water input: litres/m2/day

30

Crop yield: kg/m2

Average yield: kg/m2
Average yield: kg/m2

There is, in fact, an area where yield is
over 10 kg/m2 and shows little variation
outside the experimental error.

10

8
6
4
2
0

10

5

9

Fertiliser: g/m2
0
5

8
7

15

20

30

25

6.1 Using other mathematical
methods

6
5
4

10
15
20
25
Water input: litres/m2/day

0

5

10
15
Fertiliser: g/m2

20

1 If Rita normally sells a packet of
cornflakes for $x, then her profit is 0.4x
and she buys them for 0.6x. Next week
she will be selling 3 packets for 2x, and
she has bought them for 1.8x. Thus her
actual profit is 0.2x, and her percentage
profit is 02.2xx = 0.1 or 10%.
2 I originally planned to buy n rolls, so I took
25n cents. The reduced price is 20 cents
and I can buy 3 more, for 20(n + 3) cents.
These two amounts are the same, so:

25

The following observations can be made:
• There is a missing row in the fertiliser
levels – this is typical of experimental
data, in that unexpected problems can
happen.
• The effect of fertiliser is less than that
of water over the range investigated.
• Both factors lead to a peak in the graph,
demonstrating that too much of either
water or fertiliser causes a reduction in
crop yield.
• Although the peak with water input is
at 20 litres/m2/day and the peak with
fertiliser is at 20 g/m2, the highest value
in the table does not correspond to
these two values; in fact it is at (25, 25).
This shows an interaction between the
two factors, i.e. more fertiliser allows
the plant to use more water or vice
versa. This may be seen in the graph
below, which shows all the data and
also indicates some variations due,
presumably, to experimental error.

25n = 20(n + 3) = 20n + 60
so:
5n = 60 and n = 12
I was originally going to buy 12 rolls.
3 This is most easily solved with the aid
of a diagram (each box represents one
second and the shaded boxes are ‘on’):
1
2
3

	Thus they all flash together at 15
seconds after starting their sequences.

	 ﻿Answers to assignments 333

4 There are four ways of picking up the first
hat; then one has been removed, so there
are three ways of picking up the second
hat; or 4 × 3 = 12 ways of picking up the
first two hats. The total number of ways
they can pick up the four hats is 4 × 3 ×
2 × 1 = 24. We must subtract from this
the number where one person or more
has the right hat.
	Look first at only one person having the
right hat. If A has the right hat, there
are 6 combinations of hat for B, C and
D (BCD, BDC, CBD, CDB, DBC, DCB).
Of these, only 2 have all BCD with the
wrong hats (CDB and DBC). The same
applies if B, C or D is the only person
with the right hat, making 8 in total.
	Look now at two people having the
right hat: this could be AB, AC, AD, BC,
BD and CD. In each case, there is only
one way the other two could be wrong,
making 6 in total.
It is impossible for exactly three people
to have the right hats.
There is only one way all four people can
have the right hats.
This makes 8 + 6 + 1 = 15 ways of at
least one person having the right hat,
leaving 9 ways that everyone has the
wrong hat.You could try to list these.

	There must be a 1.5 m gap between the
wall and the first row of tables. Each
other row has an effective width of 0.8
+ 1.5 = 2.3 m. So the number of rows
that can fit in the room is the integer
.5
below 13
2.3 = 5. Each row seats 6 × 6 + 2 =
38 people (the 2 are at the ends). 5 × 38 =
190, so A is correct.
2 The Venn diagram is as shown here. The
top-left circle represents even numbers,
the top-right circle multiples of 3 and
the bottom circle square numbers. Those
outside the three circles do not fit into
any of the categories.

2 8 10 14 6 12 3 15 21
20 22 26 18 24 27 33 39
30
28 32 34
38
36
4 16
9
5 7 11 13
17 19 23 29
31 35 37

3 These statements may be represented as
a Carroll diagram.
Leave from
Waigura

6.2 Graphical methods of solution
1 Each row of tables contains 6 tables (6 ×
2 m = 12 m) with 1.5 m gaps at each end.

Leave from
Nooli

Go to
Dulais

Do
X
not go
to
Dulais

334 Answers to assignments

1 25

X

X

	 The inner quartered square shows the
fast hydrofoil services, the outer square
the slow steamboats. The Xs mark
the cells that are empty (represent no
service). These are ferries going from
Waigura to anywhere other than Dulais
and fast hydrofoil services to anywhere
other than Dulais. All other cells may
contain services.
We can now answer the statements:
A Hydrofoils from Nooli to Dulais are
represented by the inner, top-right box
and are possible. So this statement
cannot be concluded.
B As the inner, top-right box is possible,
this statement cannot be true;
hydrofoils could leave from Nooli.
C This is not true – hydrofoils from
Nooli to places other than Dulais are
represented by the inner, bottom-right
box, which is empty.
D Steamboats from Waigura to Dulais
are represented by the outer, top-left
box, so this statement is possible;
but it cannot be concluded from the
data, as it could be that all the
ferries from Waigura to Dulais are
hydrofoils.
E This is true, since no hydrofoils from
Waigura go elsewhere.
4 The diagram shows the arrival times of
Anna and Bella.
4 p.m.

Bella’s arrival time

3 p.m.
2 p.m.
1 p.m.
12 p.m.
11 a.m.
10 a.m.
9 a.m.

8

9

a.m
.
a.m
10 .
a.
11 m.
a.
12 m.
a.m
1 .
p.
m
2 .
p.
m
3 .
p.
m
4 .
p.
m
.

8 a.m.

Anna’s arrival time

The shaded area represents the times
when the two girls coincide. For example,
if Anna arrives at 12, she will meet Bella
if Bella arrives any time between 11.15
and 1.00; the area between these, and
such equivalent times, is shaded. The
probability required is the area of the
shaded portion divided by the whole area
of the graph. The large white triangles
have areas of: 7 2× 7 = 24.5 units (upper) and
7.25 × 7.25
= 26.3 units (lower). The whole
2
graph has an area of 8 × 8 = 64 units. Thus
the shaded portion has an area of 64 –
24.5 – 26.3 = 13.2 units, so the chances of
them meeting are 1364.2 = 0.206 or 20.6%.
This problem would be very difficult to
solve without a graphical method.

6.3 Probability, tree diagrams
and decision trees
1 This can be solved using a tree diagram
(see page 336).
The asterisked combinations give two
matching pairs.
There are 8 possibilities and the
probabilities of all but the last are the
same. The probabilities need to be
worked out with a calculator and are as
follows:
7 × 0.0699 + 0.0150 = 0.5043
(The 0.0699 is the result of the first 7
asterisked calculations: 8 14 × 7 13 ×
6
5
12 × 11 , and the .0150 is the 8th.)
Thus the chance of drawing two pairs is
approximately 50%.
2 The first two digits are 11 or 12. The
second two digits can be 11–19 or 21–29
(regardless of the first two digits) or 31
(but only if the first two digits are 12,
there being 31 days in December but not
in November). There are 37 possibilities,
so the chances of getting it right the
first time are 1 37 . The chances of getting
it right the second time are 1 36 and the
third time 1 35 . In order to calculate the
overall probability we need to add the

	 ﻿Answers to assignments 335

Chapter 6.3 Question 1
Sock 1
Probable
colour

Sock 2
Probable
colour

7
13 Blue

Sock 3
Probable
colour
6
Blue
12
6
12 Black

8
14 Blue

6
13 Black

7
12 Blue
5
12 Black

8
13 Blue

7
12 Blue
5
12 Black

6
14 Black

5
13 Black

8
12 Blue
4
12 Black

probability of getting it right the first
time ( 1 37) to the probability of getting
it wrong the first time multiplied by the
probability of getting it right the second
time (36 37 × 1 36 ), and to the probability
of getting it wrong the first two times
multiplied by the probability of getting
it right the third time (36 37 × 35 36 × 1 35 ).
The total chance in three attempts is
36
36
35
3
1
1
1
37 + ( 37 × 36 ) + ( 37 ×
36 × 35 ) = 37
or 8.1%.
3 Let us suppose that the probability of
hitting the nearer pole is 1 2 and the
probability of hitting the farther pole

336 Answers to assignments

Sock 4
Probable
colour
5
11 Blue

8
7
6
5
* 14 × 13 × 12 × 11

6
11 Black
6
11 Blue
5
11 Black

8
7
6
5
* 14 × 13 × 12 × 11

6
11 Blue
5
11 Black
7
11 Blue

8
6
7
5
* 14 × 13 × 12 × 11
8
6
5
7
* 14 × 13 × 12 × 11

4
11 Black
6
11 Blue
5
11 Black
7
11 Blue

6
8
7
5
* 14 × 13 × 12 × 11
6
8
5
7
* 14 × 13 × 12 × 11

4
11 Black
7
11 Blue

6
5
8
7
* 14 × 13 × 12 × 11

4
11 Black
8
11 Blue
3
11 Black

6
5
4
3
* 14 × 13 × 12 × 11

is 1 3 . (If the question can be answered,
it clearly does not matter what the exact
probabilities are or we would have been
given them.)
If we throw near, far, near, the
probabilities of throwing two in a row
are as follows:
Hit, hit, miss: 1 2 × 1 3 × 1 2 = 1 12
Miss, hit, hit: 1 2 × 1 3 × 1 2 = 1 12
Hit, hit, hit: 1 2 × 1 3 × 1 2 = 1 12
The total probability of winning is
or 25%.

3

12

showing those for a machine achieving
a 95% detection rate. Fixed costs are
ignored; these figures just represent the
total income minus the quality control
costs for the different assumptions.
We can now construct the decision tree,
as shown below.

If we throw far, near, far, the probabilities
of throwing two in a row are as follows:
Hit, hit, miss: 1 3 × 1 2 × 2 3 = 2 18
Miss, hit, hit: 2 3 × 1 2 × 1 3 = 2 18
Hit, hit, hit: 1 3 × 1 2 × 1 3 = 1 18
The total probability of winning is 5 18
or about 28%. The second strategy is
better. Some may regard this as counterintuitive as it involves two throws at
the harder target. Did you expect this
answer? Can you rationalise why the
second strategy should be the best?
Can you prove that it works for all
probabilities (as long as the farther target
is harder to hit)?
4 We first need to do some calculations
on the various options. These are
summarised in the table on page 338,
with the second column showing the
figures for a machine achieving a 99%
detection rate and the third column

	The differences are quite small – the
present system shows a saving of $830
in almost $1 million. However, the
automatic system carries an 80% chance
of the loss being $1750.

6.4 Have you solved it?
Variable responses

7.1 Conditions and conditionals
1 a	Reading the book is a necessary but
not a sufficient condition for passing
the exam.

$941,350

Contribution
to expected
value
$188,270

$936,750

$749,400

Income
Detection rate 99%
20% chance

Automatic system

Detection rate 95%
80% chance

Overall expected value $937,670
Stay with manual QC system

$938,500

	 ﻿Answers to assignments 337

Costs per year over 4 years
Manual
Production

Auto (99%)

Auto (95%)

500,000

500,000

500,000

2

2

2

25

25

25

40,000

0

0

Machine cost $

0

45,000

45,000

Redundancy cost $

0

2500

2500

0.01

0.01

0.01

Detection rate

0.9

0.99

0.95

Number faulty

5000

5000

5000

Faulty and detected

4500

4950

4750

Faulty and sent out

500

50

250

Total sent out

495,500

495,050

495,250

Income from sales $

991,000

990,100

990,500

Compensation costs $

12,500

1250

6250

Total costs $

52,500

48,750

53,750

Net income $

938,500

941,350

936,750

Unit sale value $
Unit compensation cost $
Labour cost $

Failure rate

338 Answers to assignments

b B
 is the correct answer, because
reading the book was a necessary
condition only. Statement A treats
reading the book as a sufficient
condition, whereas it is only
necessary; C would have to be true
only if the prediction was that all
those who read the book would pass.
But that was not the prediction. In
fact everyone could fail, readers of
the book included, and the tutor’s
prediction would not have been
wrong. D turns the prediction
round and makes passing the exam
a condition for having read the
book; this does not follow from the
prediction. E does not have to be true
because reading the book was not a
sufficient condition for passing the
exam.
2
A Yes. Being 21 or over is a necessary
condition for approval.
B No. The person might be under 21.
C Correct. The person might not have a
clean licence.
D Yes. Passing an ADQ is necessary
for anyone under 25, as Jason is;
but not sufficient because a clean
licence is also necessary.
E Yes. Being under 21 is a sufficient
condition for refusal.
3 Variable responses, but it should be
recognised that the structure of water
is a necessary (but not sufficient)
condition for life as we know it.

7.2 Soundness and validity: a taste
of logic
1 [A] is invalid, and therefore unsound.
Lemons, as it happens, are citrus fruits,
but many things with a sharp, acidic
taste – such as pickled onions – are not.
Therefore having sharp and acidic taste
is not a good enough reason to say that
something is a citrus fruit.

	[B] on the other hand is valid and
sound. Its premises are both true and the
conclusion follows from them. If citrus
fruits have a particular taste, then lemons,
which are citrus fruits, must have that
taste.
2 This is a valid argument. You can show
this by simplifying it as follows: ‘If this
is a diamond it would scratch glass.
It doesn’t scratch glass. So it isn’t a
diamond.’ As for the premises, the first
is true: diamonds do scratch glass. The
second we are told is true. Therefore the
argument is sound as far as we can tell.
3 This argument is also valid. If it is
true that the president really would
be in prison if he were guilty, and he
is not in prison, then he is not guilty.
What makes this argument seem
unconvincing is not that the conclusion
doesn’t follow from the premises
but that the first premise is open to
question. An awful lot of presidents
have been guilty of corruption and
escaped prison. That doesn’t alter the
logical fact that if the premises were true
the conclusion would have to follow;
but it does cast doubt on the overall
soundness of the argument.
4 [A] The most obvious answer is that
Nathan is a professional. (The
argument would have the valid
form: ‘If m then p; m; therefore
p’ – with m for money and p for
professional.)
[B] The most obvious answer is that
Eunice has not accepted prize or
sponsorship money. (‘If m then p;
Not-p; therefore Not-m.’)
[C] There is no obvious conclusion. Not
accepting money doesn’t establish
that Abbas is not a professional;
he might earn money from
coaching and be a professional for
that reason. Logically, ‘If m then
p; Not-m; therefore Not-p’ is an

	 ﻿Answers to assignments 339

invalid form of argument, like [11]
in the chapter. The best answer to
[C] might be: ‘So what?’ The two
sentences of [C] tell us practically
nothing in relation to each other.

7.3 Non-deductive reasoning
1 Clive relied on a compass to direct him
in poor visibility because, in his long
experience, it had not let him down.
However, he was ignorant of the fact
that in some places a compass does not
act in its customary way. Past experience
was not, therefore, sufficient grounds for
inferring that the compass would always
behave predictably – as Clive discovered.
2 There are various ways to interpret the
reasoning, but clearly the conclusion is
that Big Brother is not harmless. There is a
chain of reasoning leading to this. Here is
one plausible way it may be understood:
R1 You can’t imprison people . . .
without it affecting their
personalities.
R2 You can see people are not the
same when they come out as they
were before.
	  
IC   (So) it’s a very dangerous game
they’re playing (as any psychiatrist
will tell you).
R3 People are seriously damaged
– mentally – by being in that house.
	  
C     You are wrong: Big Brother is not
harmless.
Evaluation: If it were true that people are
seriously damaged (R3), then it would
follow that Big Brother is not harmless.
Indeed it would follow deductively, or
by definition, because clearly anything
damaging is harmful. R3, however, is not
supported by R1, R2 or the IC. If it were
it would be an intermediate conclusion
itself. R1 and R2 do lead to IC, but just
because something is dangerous doesn’t

340 Answers to assignments

mean that it actually causes damage.
Our evaluation of the argument is
that the chain breaks down at these
points. Even if R1 and R2 are true, the
conclusion does not follow from them.
3 Variable responses

7.4 Reasoning with statistics
1 a	Various responses are acceptable. For
example: the extract is making the
claim that peaks in crime rates tend
to be associated with a significant
reduction in the prison population,
and cites an incident in Italy as
a paradigm example. (‘Paradigm
example’ here means prime, or
perfect, example.) The graph takes
bank robberies as an indicator of
the effect of lowering the prison
population suddenly. The figures
apparently shoot up by almost as
much as the prison population falls.
Previously, when prison numbers
were rising before the pardon, and
again afterwards, the bank robbery
rates reduce. Look carefully however
at the scales on the graph. 200,000
prisoners are released, and there is
a peak of 8% bank robberies in the
month after the pardon, compared
with several between 6% and 7%
before the pardon. Does the scale
of the graph create an accurate or
an exaggerated impression of the
difference the released prisoners
made? You may also have questioned
why bank robberies in particular
were selected. Did other serious
crimes offer corroborating data?
		As for the extract, 160,000 policereported offences again sounds
impressive. But there are questions
to ask, for instance about the nature
and severity of the offences.
b Variable responses
2 Variable responses

7.5 Decision making

7.6 Principles

The answer is B. On economic grounds alone
Zenergies should decline the offer and proceed
to extract the gas. The revised projections
suggest that the company would probably be
better off by $1.9 million by taking this
decision.

Variable responses

7.7 An argument under the
microscope
Variable responses

7.8 Critical writing
Variable responses

	 ﻿Answers to assignments 341

Appendix
Applicability to various awards
*** Directly relevant
** Broadly relevant
* Some relevance

Unit 1
Cambridge Thinking
Skills: AS Level, Paper 1

***

Cambridge Thinking
Skills: AS Level, Paper 2

***

Cambridge Thinking
Skills: A Level, Paper 3

**

Cambridge Thinking
Skills: A Level, Paper 4

**

Knowledge and
Inquiry: Paper 1

Unit 2

Unit 3

Unit 4

***

***

Unit 5

Unit 6

**

**

***

*

***

*

***

*

***

**

**

*

*

**

Knowledge and
Inquiry: Paper 2

***

***

***

***

OCR Critical Thinking:
AS Level, Paper 1

**

**

OCR Critical Thinking:
AS Level, Paper 2

**

**

OCR Critical Thinking:
A Level, Paper 3

*

*

OCR Critical Thinking:
A Level, Paper 4

*

*

***

AQA Critical Thinking:
AS Level, Paper 1

**

***

***

342 Appendix

***

Unit 7

*

**

***

***

*

**

*

*

*

**

**

Unit 1

Unit 2

Unit 3

Unit 4

Unit 5

Unit 6

Unit 7

AQA Critical Thinking:
AS Level, Paper 2

**

**

*

**

AQA Critical Thinking:
A Level, Paper 3

*

*

*

AQA Critical Thinking:
A Level, Paper 4

*

*

BMAT Paper 1

**

***

***

**

TSA

**

***

***

*

LNAT

*

*

UK CAT

**

**

**

*

*

*

*

IB: Theory of
Knowledge

*

**

*

**

*

*

**

***

***

***

**

***

***

***

**

**

**

*

**

**

	 ﻿Appendix 343

Acknowledgements
The authors and publishers acknowledge the following sources of copyright material and are
grateful for the permissions granted. While every effort has been made, it has not always been
possible to identify the sources of all the material used, or to trace all copyright holders. If any
omissions are brought to our notice, we will be happy to include the appropriate
acknowledgements on reprinting.
Questions on pages 49, 69 and 253 from OCR
AEA Paper 1, June 2002, and OCR Teacher’s
Support Pack, Critical Thinking, September
2002, reproduced courtesy of OCR

Dolphin Conservation

Questions on pages 208–209 and 218–219
reproduced by permission of Cambridge
International Examinations

pp. 226–227 charts from UK Giving Report
2011 by permission of the NCVO

p. 128 cartoon © Jack Corbett,
www.cartoonstock.com
pp. 131–132 © Crown copyright, from
‘Effects of advertising in respect of
compensation claims for personal injury’,
Department of Constitutional Affairs, March
2006
p. 140 © Parliamentary copyright, ‘Reported
Road Accident Statistics’ by Matthew Keep &
Tom Rutherford, House of Commons Library,
SN/SG/2198
pp. 165–166 from ‘Social networks: Human
social networks’ by Robin Dunbar, New
Scientist, issue 2859, 3rd April 2012
p. 196 ‘Walk this way!’ by Danny Groves,
issue 53 (Spring 2011) of Whale & Dolphin,
the membership publication of Whale and

344 Acknowledgements

p. 225 © Crown Copyright from
http://Scotland.gov.uk/
Publications/2011/12/06114834/0 (adapted)

p. 278 © Giovanni Mastrobuoni, ‘The
Incapacitation Effect of Incarceration:
Evidence from Several Italian Collective
Pardons’
pp. 302–305 by Harvey Abrams, Olympic
Historian
Thanks to the following for permission to
reproduce photographs:
Cover DrAfter123/iStockphoto; p. 10t US
Library of Congress/Science Photo Library;
p. 10b Wikimedia Commons; p. 43l Tim
Graham/Alamy; p. 43r Andrew Holbrooke/
Corbis; p. 136 Jutta Klee/ableimages/Corbis;
p. 163 Oculo/Shutterstock; p. 196 Steve
Bloom Images/Alamy; p. 269 trekandshoot/
Shutterstock

Index
abductive reasoning, 264
ABE (argument to the best explanation), 264
ad hominem arguments, 184
ad ignorantiam arguments, 201
ad populum arguments, 133
algebraic methods, 232–3
alternative explanations, 139–40
analogy, 174–5, 265–7
analysis, 177–81
anecdotal evidence, 71–2
animal intelligence, 2
anomalies, 140–1
answers
checking, 246–7
intermediate, 93
antecedents, 251
approximation, 246
argument indicators, 28
arguments, 8, 28–32
from analogy, 174–5, 265–7
analysis, 38–42
to the best explanation, 264
complex, 43–8, 52–4, 170–5
conclusions, 50–6
counter-arguments, 47–8, 177–81
ethical, 187–8, 291–4
flawed, 70, 73–4
further argument, 191–4
identification, 33–7
reported, 46–7
soundness and validity, 254–61
argumentum ad hominem, 184
argumentum ad ignorantiam, 201
argumentum ad populum, 133
assertions, 16, 63
assumptions, 63–8, 183–4
attitude, 8–9
audience, 8
authors, 8

balance of probability, 24
‘begging the question’ flaws, 188–9
Carroll diagrams, 236–7
causal explanations, 25, 137–42
cause-correction fallacy, 76
certainties, 24
charity, principle of, 52, 201
checking answers, 246–7
choices, 123–4, 279–80
circular reasoning, 189
circumstantial evidence, 145
claims, 16, 31, 58, 61
conditional (hypothetical), 25, 251
to fact, 17
judging, 21–6
particular, 26, 71
sources, 150
strong and weak, 25–6, 72
classic fallacies, 75
clauses, 24–5
combinations, 233
complex arguments, 43–8, 52–4
complex claims, 24–5
conclusions, 50–6, 58–9
diffuse, 54–5
implicit, 60–1, 126
intermediate, 43
jumping to, 75, 139
multiple, 52–4
and reasons, 28
conditional claims, 25, 251
conditional statements, 250–1
conditions, 249–52
connectives, 24–5
consequences, 279–82
consequentialism, 292
consequents, 251
context, 196–7

	 ﻿Index 345

control groups, 274
correlation, 76, 166
corroborative evidence, 145–6, 153, 163
counter-arguments, 47–8, 177–81
counter-examples, 192
creative thinking, 2
credibility, 150–3
critical evaluation, 183–90
Critical Thinking (academic discipline), 7–8
cynicism, 9
data, 86–8
analysis, 225–7
processing, 90–2
raw, 144, 269–70
scientific, 163
selectivity, 270–4
decision trees, 242–4, 283–5
decision making, 123–4, 279–85
declarative sentences, 16
deductive reasoning, 256–7, 260
deep-rooted assumptions, 67–8
definition, claims by, 24
degree, differences of, 289–91
deontology, 292–3
diagrammatic information, 86, 88
differences of degree, 289–91
differences of kind, 289–91
diffuse conclusions, 54–5
dilemmas, 309–10
direct evidence, 145
directed searches, 98–9
distracters, 53
documents, 7
elimination of incorrect answers, 247
embedded arguments, 46–7
ethical arguments, 187–8, 291–4
Euler diagrams, 256–7
evaluation, 22, 183–90
evidence, 144–8
anecdotal, 71–2
circumstantial, 145
corroborative, 145–6, 153, 163
‘hearsay’, 11, 145
inadmissible, 151

346 Index

photographic, 161
statistical, 269–77
exhaustive searches, 98–9
expertise, 151
explanations, 25, 137–42
explicit assumptions, 63
eyewitness accounts, 145, 151–2
facts, and opinions, 16–17
fairness, arguments from, 188
fallacies, 70–7
false cause, 76
flawed reasoning, 70, 73–4, 184
flow diagrams, 249–50
further argument, 191–4
generalisations, 26, 71
genre, 196–7
graphical information, 86, 87, 102–4
graphical methods of solution, 235–7
heuristic methods, 82
hidden premises, 64–5
‘higher order’ skills, 1
hypotheses, 18–19, 106–9, 168
hypothetical claims, 25, 251
imaginative thinking, 2
imperative sentences, 16
implicit assumptions, 63, 65–6
implicit conclusions, 60–1, 126
inadmissible evidence, 151
independent thinking, 9
indirect evidence, 145
induction, 263
inference, 38, 74–5, 106–9, 126–35, 225–7
inference indicators, 28
insufficient reason, 72–3
interdependent premises, 39
intermediate answers, 93
intermediate conclusions, 43
interrogative sentences, 16
investigations, 220–3
jumping to conclusions, 75, 139
justified claims, 21–3

Kant, Immanuel, 293
kind, differences of, 289–91
knowledge, 24
Köhler, Wolfgang, 2

principle of charity, 52, 201
principles, 287–94
probability, 17–18, 24, 240–4, 280
‘putting the answer back’, 246

logic, 254–61
logical forms, 252
lowest common multiples (LCMs), 233

qualification of judgements, 24
quantitative data, 106–9
questions, rhetorical, 19

mapping, of arguments, 180
mathematical models, 119–21, 211–18
methods of solution, 93–6
mistaken cause, 76
mixed arguments, 41–2
models, 119–21, 211–18
multiple conclusions, 52–4

raw data, 144, 269–70
reason, insufficient, 72–3
reason indicators, 28
reasoning, 2
circular, 189
deductive, 256–7, 260
flawed, 70, 73–4, 184
non-deductive, 262–8
spatial, 112–14
with statistics, 269–77
suppositional, 157, 251
reasons, 58–61, 106–9
and conclusions, 28
insufficient, 72–3
recommendations, 19
reflection, 2
relevance, 59–60
reported arguments, 46–7
reputation, 151
‘restricting the options’, 173
rhetoric, 186
rhetorical questions, 19

necessary and sufficient conditions, 249–52
necessity, 116–17
neutrality, and credibility, 152
non sequitur, 59, 60
non-deductive reasoning, 262–8
objective claims, 17
observations, scientific, 163
open mindedness, 9
opinion, popular, 131–3
opinions, facts and, 16–17
particular claims, 26, 71
pattern recognition, 102–4
peer review, 164
percentages, 231–2
permutations, 233
photographic evidence, 161
pictorial information, 86, 88
plausibility, 138–9, 141, 150
popular opinion, 131, 131–3
post hoc fallacies, 75–6
pragmatics, 291
predictions, 17–18
pre-emptive moves, 178
premise indicators, 28
premises, 29, 58–61
hidden, 64–5
interdependent, 39
missing, 66–7

safe inferences, 126, 128
scepticism, 9
science, critical thinking in, 126–8, 163–9
searching, 98–100
selective searches, 99
selectivity of data, 270–4
‘slippery slope’ flaws, 188–9, 290–1
‘smoking gun’ evidence, 145–6
solution, methods of, 93–6
sorites paradox, 291
sound arguments, 70, 254–61
sources of claims, 150
spatial reasoning, 112–14
standards, for judging claims, 23–4
statements, 16

	 ﻿Index 347

conditional, 250–1
by witnesses, 145, 151–2
statistical evidence, 269–77
‘straw man’ flaws, 38, 188–9
strong claims, 25–6, 72
sub-arguments, 43
subjective claims, 17
sufficiency, 116–17
sufficient conditions, 249–52
suggestions, 19
suppositional reasoning, 157, 251
synthesis, 301, 309–10
tabular information, 86–7, 102–4
testimony, 145
texts, 7, 196–7
thinking, creative, 2
three-dimensional reasoning, 112–14
tree diagrams, 241, 283
trust, 21

348 Index

truth, 21, 22
tu quoque fallacy, 268
two-dimensional reasoning, 112–14
unjustified claims, 22
unsafe inferences, 126, 128
unsound arguments, 70, 254
utilitarianism, 292
valid arguments, 254–61
value, 280
value judgements, 17
Venn diagrams, 95, 236–7
verbal information, 87, 102–4
vested interests, 152
warranted claims, 21–3
weak claims, 25–6, 72
witness statements, 145, 151–2

